# arXiv:1506.06819v1[math.CO]22Jun2015

## Simplicial and Cellular Trees

Art M. Duval, Caroline J. Klivans, and Jeremy L. Martin

##### 1 Introduction

How can redundancy be eliminated from a network, and what can be said about the resulting substructures? In graph-theoretic terms, these substructures are spanning trees. The collection of all spanning trees of a graph has the structure of a matroid basis system; this observation connects trees to algebraic combinatorics and explains why many graph algorithms can be made computationally ef’¼ücient. The number of spanning trees of a graph measures its complexity as a network, and there are classical and ef’¼ücient linear-algebraic tools for calculating this number, as well as for enumerating trees more ’¼ünely. The algebra of trees is key in studying dynamical systems on graphs, notably the abelian sandpile model (known in other forms as the chip-’¼üring game or dollar game), whose possible states are encoded by a group of size equal to the complexity of the underlying graph.

This chapter is about the more recent theory of spanning trees in cell complexes, which are natural higher-dimensional analogues of graphs. The theory for cell complexes parallels the graph-theoretical version in many ways, including the connection to matroid theory. However, higher-dimensional spaces can have much richer topology, which complicates the algebraic and enumerative parts of the story in a very concrete way. It turns out that the simple number of spanning trees of a cell complex is not a well-behaved invariant, and it is better to account for topological complexity in the enumeration. On the other hand, many essential algebraic tools for working with spanning trees of a graph do extend well to arbitrary dimension.

Art M. Duval Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Texas at El Paso, e-mail: aduval@utep.edu

Caroline J. Klivans Division of Applied Mathematics and Department of Computer Science, Brown University, e-mail: klivans@brown.edu

Jeremy L. Martin Department of Mathematics, University of Kansas, e-mail: jlmartin@ku.edu

1

Sections 1 and 2 give an overview of the subject, including the history of the subject of higher-dimensional trees and emphasizing the geometry and topology of trees. As far as possible, we have attempted to make these sections self-contained and accessible to readers not familiar with the machinery of algebraic topology, although a certain amount of technical material is unavoidable. The next two sections are more technical: Section 3 describes the various extensions of the matrix-tree theorem from graphs to cell complexes, and Section 4 examines individual classes of cell complexes whose tree enumerators are understood. Finally, Section 5 covers new directions, including extensions of algebraic graph theory and connections to critical groups, cuts and ’¼éows, simplicial decompositions, and matroids.

##### 1.1 Higher-dimensional trees

The higher-dimensional trees considered here were ’¼ürst studied by Bolker [Bol76], in the context of transportation polytopes, which are solution sets to certain combinatorial optimization problems. The vertices of transportation polytopes are spanning trees of complete colorful complexes, which are higher-dimensional generalizations of complete bipartite graphs. Bolker pinpointed the basic homological conditions on spanning trees (essentially De’¼ünition 2.6 below). Kalai [Kal83] considered spanning trees of complete simplicial complexes, which generalize complete graphs, and obtained a beautiful enumerative formula generalizing CayleyŌĆÖs formula. Soon after, Adin [Adi92] gave a corresponding formula for counting spanning trees in complete colorful complexes. More recently, many authors, including Duval, Klivans and Martin [DKM09, DKM11, DKM15], Lyons [Lyo09] and Petersson [Pet09], independently observed that Bolker and KalaiŌĆÖs de’¼ünitions could be extended to general cell complexes to develop a broad theory of higher-dimensional trees.

Algebraically speaking, one can de’¼üne a spanning tree of a suitably connected cell complex to be any subcomplex generated by faces corresponding to a linearly independent set of columns of a certain matrix (see De’¼ünition 2.5). However, this de’¼ünition does not really re’¼éect the topology of higher-dimensional trees. By analogy, a spanning tree T of a connected graph G can be de’¼üned as a collection of edges which correspond to a column basis of the oriented incidence matrix of G. But this de’¼ünition does not directly capture what a tree looks like, and the most familiar de’¼ünitions are more topological and combinatorial in nature:

- ŌĆó T is connected and acyclic;
- ŌĆó T is connected and |T| = nŌłÆ1 (where n is the number of vertices);
- ŌĆó T is acyclic and |T| = nŌłÆ1;
- ŌĆó T is a maximal acyclic subgraph of G;
- ŌĆó T is a minimal connected subgraph of G.


Similarly, for a d-dimensional cell complex X with codimension-1 Betti number ╬▓dŌłÆ1(X) = 0 (the analogue of connectedness for graphs), a subcomplex T ŌŖå X is a spanning tree if it satis’¼ües any of the following equivalent properties:

- ŌĆó ╬▓d(T) = ╬▓dŌłÆ1(T) = 0;
- ŌĆó ╬▓d(T) = 0 and |Td| = |Xd|ŌłÆ╬▓d(X);
- ŌĆó ╬▓dŌłÆ1(T) = 0 and |Td| = |Xd|ŌłÆ╬▓d(X);
- ŌĆó T is maximal among the spanning subcomplexes of X with ╬▓d(T) = 0;
- ŌĆó T is minimal among the spanning subcomplexes of X with ╬▓dŌłÆ1(T) = 0.


A more complete list of characterizations, including the more general notion of spanning forests when ╬▓dŌłÆ1(X) > 0, is given in Proposition 2.13. De’¼ünitions and notation for the terms above are also given in Section 2.

Many cellular spanning trees ŌĆ£look likeŌĆØ trees. For instance, a 2-dimensional simplicial complex whose dual graph forms a tree automatically satis’¼ües the conditions above; see the ’¼ürst complex in Figure 1. On the other hand, many higherdimensional trees look less familiar. For instance, if X is any cellular sphere (such as the boundary of a polytope), then its spanning trees are the contractible subcomplexes formed by removing a single maximal face; this is the higher-dimensional generalization of the fact that the spanning trees of a cycle graph are the paths formed from it by deleting one edge. Of particular interest (and the source of much dif’¼üculty) is the existence of trees with torsion homology, which can occur in any dimension Ōēź 2. Already in dimension 2, trees can have ’¼ünite non-trivial homology. The smallest simplicial example is the standard triangulation of the real projective plane RP2, which arises as a spanning tree of the 2-dimensional skeleton of the 6-vertex simplex. See Examples 2.11 and 2.12.

##### 1.2 Tree numbers

The subject of enumerating spanning trees traditionally dates back to KirchhoffŌĆÖs 1847 work on electrical circuits [Kir47]. Excellent general references with more historical details include Moon [Moo70] and Stanley [Sta99, pp. 54ŌĆō69]. In modern terms, let G be a connected graph on n vertices whose Laplacian matrix L = L(G) has nonzero eigenvalues ╬╗1,...,╬╗nŌłÆ1, and let T (G) denote its set of spanning trees. Then the matrix-tree theorem (or KirchhoffŌĆÖs theorem) states that

╬╗1┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę╬╗nŌłÆ1 n

Žä(G) = detL╦£ =

(1)

where Žä(G) = |T (G)| and L╦£ denotes the reduced Laplacian obtained from L by deleting the ith row and column (for any i). Thus tree enumeration is closely tied in with the broad subject of spectral graph theory; see, e.g., [CDS80, Chu97]. A most important special case is the formula

Žä(Kn) = nnŌłÆ2 (2)

for the number of spanning trees of the complete graph Kn, known as CayleyŌĆÖs formula, although it was in fact ’¼ürst observed by Sylvester [Syl57] and ’¼ürst proved, in an equivalent form, by Borchardt [Bor60]. CayleyŌĆÖs formula can be deduced from the matrix-tree theorem by ’¼ünding an explicit eigenbasis for L(Kn). Independent combinatorial proofs include the well-known Pr┬©ufer code [Pr┬©u18] and JoyalŌĆÖs bijection using permutations [Joy81, pp. 15-16]; see also [Sta99, pp. 25ŌĆō28].

There are other families of graphs with nice spanning tree counts which can be obtained either algebraically (using the matrix-tree theorem) or combinatorially (via a bijection). For example, the number of spanning trees of the complete bipartite graph Km,n is

Žä(Km,n) = nmŌłÆ1mnŌłÆ1 (3)

as discovered by several authors [Aus60, SH59, FS58, Sco62], and arises in the transportation problem of combinatorial optimization [KW68].

Moving to higher dimensions, in BolkerŌĆÖs original work, he observed that it is ŌĆ£tempting on numerological groundsŌĆØ to generalize the well-known formulas (2) and (3), but also was aware that the obvious generalizations were incorrect because of torsion trees, i.e., d-dimensional trees T with HdŌłÆ1(T;Z) ’¼ünite but nontrivial. Kalai [Kal83] was the ’¼ürst to pinpoint the role played by torsion. He showed that the correct analogue of the tree count for a d-dimensional simplicial complex X is not simply the cardinality of the set T (X) of simplicial spanning trees, but rather the quantity

Žä(X)= Ōłæ

|HdŌłÆ1(T)|2 (4)

TŌłłT (X)

where HdŌłÆ1(T) denotes the (d ŌłÆ 1)-dimensional reduced homology group of T over Z. The summands in (4) arise naturally in the expansion of the combinatorial Laplacian matrix of X using the Binet-Cauchy formula. Note that torsion has no effect on spanning tree enumeration in graphs; every topological space has torsion-free 0th homology group, so when X is a graph the right-hand side of (4) reduces to the number of spanning trees. (On the other hand, torsion does arise in enumerative problems equivalent or related to tree enumeration; see, e.g., [MR05, BH06, BBGM14, DM12].) Additional evidence that Žä(X) is the right way to count trees is KalaiŌĆÖs striking generalization of CayleyŌĆÖs formula:

Žä(Kn,d) = n(nŌłÆd2) (5)

where Kn,d denotes the d-dimensional skeleton of an n-vertex simplex. Subsequently, Adin [Adi92] used the same ideas to give a formula for the torsion-weighted count of a complete colorful complex, generalizing (3). Both formulas were precisely those predicted by Bolker. Kalai also gave a weighted version of (5) enumerating spanning trees by their degree sequences [Kal83, Thm. 3 ] and showed that torsion accounts for most of the quantity Žä(X): as Kalai put it, spanning trees of Kn,d are ŌĆ£on the average, far from being [Z-]acyclicŌĆØ [Kal83, ┬¦5].

The torsion-weighted spanning tree count of a cell complex Xd can be computed from its combinatorial Laplacian operator L. This essential fact, the cellular matrix-

tree theorem, has appeared in various forms in [DKM09, DKM11, Lyo09, Pet09, CCK12], all building on the ideas originating in [Kal83] and [Adi92]. We will describe the different guises of this theorem, and their interconnections, in Section 3 below. As in the graphical case, Žä(X) may be expressed via a determinant or via eigenvalues. Speci’¼ücally, for a d-dimensional complex X, the torsion-weighted tree count of d-dimensional trees is given by

╬╗1┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę╬╗k ŽädŌłÆ1(X)

Žäd(X) = c┬ĘdetL╦£ = c ┬Ę

where c and c are certain correction factors arising from torsion homology; L╦£ is the reduced Laplacian formed from L by removing the rows and columns corresponding to a codimension-1 spanning tree; and the ╬╗i are the non-zero eigenvalues of L.

In practice, for many families of complexes of combinatorial interest (e.g., Cohen-Macaulay complexes), the homological correction factors c and c disappear. In this case, the weighted tree count is given precisely by a determinant, as in KalaiŌĆÖs enumeration of skeletons of simplices. In general, the eigenvalue formulation of the matrix-tree theorem is recursive; the count for d-dimensional trees is expressed in terms of the count for (dŌłÆ1)-dimensional trees. In the case that c = 1, the recursion yields the alternating-product expression

╬╗1 ┬Ę ╬╗3 ┬Ę ╬╗5┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę ╬╗0 ┬Ę ╬╗2 ┬Ę ╬╗4┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę

Žäd(X) =

where ╬╗i is the product of the non-zero eigenvalues of the ith Laplacian. Laplacians of simplicial complexes ’¼ürst appeared in the work of Eckmann [Eck45]

and Dodziuk and Patodi [DP76]. They were studied as combinatorial objects by Friedman [Fri98] and Friedman and Hanlon [FH98], who in particular considered the phenomenon of integral Laplacian eigenvalues. Subsequently, many combinatorially signi’¼ücant classes of complexes have been shown to have all integer Laplacian eigenvalues, such as chessboard complexes [FH98], matroid complexes [KRS00], shifted complexes [DR02], and hypercubes [DKM11]. The strong connection between Laplacian eigenvalues and tree enumeration suggests that these families might support nice spanning tree counts with combinatorial interpretations. Indeed, there are many successes in this direction including enumerators for shifted complexes in terms of critical pairs [DKM09] and for matroid complexes in terms of ’¼éats and the ╬▓-invariant [KL15a]. We will look at many of these families individually in Section 4.

##### 1.3 Beyond basic de’¼ünitions and enumeration

The theory of trees has recently emerged as a natural aspect of the combinatorics of cellular spaces. We describe several new directions in Section 5. Many fundamental objects of algebraic graph theory have been generalized to higher dimension, in-

cluding critical groups and generalized sandpile/chip-’¼üring models (┬¦5.1) and cuts and ’¼éows (┬¦5.2). Simplicial trees provide an inroad to studying theorems and conjectures about decompositions of simplicial complexes (┬¦5.3). Finally, the study of cellular matroids has led to new topological invariants on cellular manifolds and applications to probability (┬¦5.4).

##### 2 Trees and forests: from graphs to cell complexes

The de’¼ünitions of higher-dimensional trees and forests may be approached from various directions, including linear algebra and matroid theory, but ultimately some topological machinery is necessary to appreciate the ideas fully. We will attempt to give an informal, self-contained description of those concepts that we need such as cell complexes and homology, that will be accessible to a reader willing to endure a little black-box algebra. For the precise details, the reader should consult a standard reference such as Hatcher [Hat02].

##### 2.1 Trees and forests in graphs

Let G = (V,E) be a ’¼ünite graph, with |V| = n and |E| = m. For each edge e on vertices v and w, ’¼üx an orientation e = v ŌåÆ w. The signed incidence matrix ŌłéG is then de’¼üned as the n├Śm matrix with entries

’Ż▒ ’Ż┤’Ż▓

1 if e = u ŌåÆ v for some u = v, ŌłÆ1 if e = v ŌåÆ w for some w = v, 0 otherwise.

Ōłév,e =

’Ż┤’Ż│

In particular, the eth column of Ōłé is zero if and only if e is a loop. We now recall several well-known equivalent de’¼ünitions of trees and forests from graph theory.

De’¼ünition 2.1. The graph G is a tree if it satis’¼ües any of the following equivalent properties:

- (a) G is connected and acyclic.
- (b) G is connected and m = nŌłÆ1.
- (c) G is acyclic and m = nŌłÆ1.
- (d) Every pair of vertices in G is connected by exactly one path.
- (e) G is a maximal acyclic graph.
- (f) G is a minimal connected graph.
- (g) For any (hence every) orientation of G, the columns of ŌłéG are a basis for the space Rn0 = {v Ōłł Rn | v1 +┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę+vn = 0}.


Meanwhile, G is a forest if it satis’¼ües any of the following equivalent properties:

- (h) G is acyclic.
- (i) Every pair of vertices in G is connected by at most one path.
- (j) The columns of the incidence matrix ŌłéG of G are linearly independent.
- (k) Every connected component of G is a tree.


In order to extend the ideas of trees and forests, we ’¼ürst have to describe the objects that will serve as higher-dimensional analogues of graphs.

##### 2.2 Cell complexes

A cell complex X is a topological space that is the disjoint union of cells, each homeomorphic to the interior of a k-dimensional disk for some k, attached together in a locally reasonable manner. In particular, the closure of any cell is a union of cells. The set of k-cells is denoted Xk, and the k-skeleton XŌēżk is the union of all cells of dimension Ōēż k. A cell not contained in the closure of any other cell is called a facet, and a complex whose facets all have the same dimension is called pure. Every subset S of cells generates a subcomplex XS = ŽāŌłłSŽā. (We often blur the distinction between a set of cells and the subcomplex it generates.) The dimension of X is the largest dimension of one of its cells; the notation Xd indicates a cell complex of dimension d. In particular, a graph is exactly a cell complex of dimension 1.

The combinatorial data about how cells are attached is recorded by a sequence

of linear maps Ōłék = Ōłék(X) : RXk ŌåÆ RXkŌłÆ1 for 0 Ōēż k Ōēż d. The map Ōłé1 is just the (signed) incidence matrix of the 1-skeleton graph, and the other maps are higher-

dimensional analogues of the signed incidence matrix of a graph. For k > 0, each Ōłék may be represented as a matrix with rows indexed by (k ŌłÆ1)-cells Žü and columns

indexed by k-cells Žā; the entry ŌłéŽü,Žā is an integer that records, roughly speaking, the number of times that Žā is wrapped around Žü, counted with orientation. If Žü is not contained in the closure of Žā, then ŌłéŽü,Žā = 0. In particular, if some (kŌłÆ1)-cell Žü is not in the closure of any k-cell, then the corresponding row of Ōłé is zero. We formally de’¼üne Ōłé0 : RX0 ŌåÆ R to be the map that sends every point to 1 Ōłł R.

It is a standard fact that imŌłék+1 ŌŖå kerŌłék for all k, and the quotient Hk(X;R) = kerŌłék/imŌłék+1 is a topological invariant of X called its kth (reduced) homology group. The kth (reduced) Betti number is ╬▓k(X) = dimRHk(X;R). (All homology groups and Betti numbers appearing here are reduced and we will use the notation Hk and ╬▓k in place of the usual H╦£k and ╬▓╦£k for ease of readability.) The 0th reduced Betti number is one less than the number of connected components, so in particular ╬▓0(X) = 0 if and only if X is connected. If G = (V,E) is a graph with c connected components, then ╬▓1(G)=|E|ŌłÆ(|V|ŌłÆc) is the size of the complement of a maximal spanning forest (sometimes called the cyclomatic number).

Simplicial complexes are the cell complexes most familiar to combinatorialists. An (abstract) simplicial complex is a set Ōłå of subsets of [n] = {1,2,...,n}, such that whenever Žā Ōłł Ōłå and Žü ŌŖå Žā, then Žü Ōłł Ōłå. Thus a simplicial complex is completely determined by its set of facets. An abstract simplicial complex can be regarded as a

topological space by associating Žā = {i1,...,ik} Ōłł Ōłå with the interior of the convex hull of {ei1,...,eik} in Rn, where ej is the jth standard basis vector. For readers familiar with hypergraphs, a simplicial complex is just a hypergraph in which every subset of a hyperedge is also a hyperedge.

Simplicial complexes are regular cell complexes, which means that every attaching map is locally a homeomorphism; i.e., one-to-one. In particular, for a regular cell complex, every entry of every matrix Ōłék is in {0,┬▒1}.

- Example 2.2. A graph G is a 1-dimensional cell complex whose attaching map Ōłé1 is just the signed vertex-edge incidence matrix. As a cell complex, G is regular if G has no loops, and simplicial if in addition G has no parallel edges.
- Example 2.3. Gluing two hollow tetrahedra along a common triangle 123 produces a cell complex, the equatorial bipyramid, with seven 2-cells (triangles), nine 1-cells (edges), and ’¼üve 0-cells (vertices). This is an example of a simplicial complex, with facets {123,124,125,124,134,234,235} where 1,2,3 are the ŌĆ£equatorialŌĆØ vertices and 4,5 are the ŌĆ£polesŌĆØ. The collection of facets would often be considered a 3uniform hypergraph; i.e., a hypergraph where all edges have size 3.
- Example 2.4. The real projective plane RP2 can be realized as a cell complex with one cell Žāk of each dimension k for k Ōłł {0,1,2}. The 1-skeleton Žā1 Ōł¬ Žā0 forms the line at in’¼ünity; the attaching map Ōłé1 is the matrix [0] because Žā1 is a loop. Meanwhile, the attaching map Ōłé2 is the matrix [2], representing the fact that Žā2 is wrapped twice around Žā1. The smallest triangulation of RP2 (i.e., the smallest simplicial complex homeomorphic to RP2) can be obtained by identifying antipodal faces on an icosahedron. See Figure 3.


##### 2.3 Trees and forests in cell complexes

We can now de’¼üne the cellular analogues of trees and forests.

- De’¼ünition 2.5. A d-dimensional cell complex X is a d-forest if the columns of Ōłéd(X) are linearly independent. A spanning d-forest of X is a d-forest F ŌŖå X such that FŌēżdŌłÆ1 = XŌēżdŌłÆ1.

Here the term ŌĆ£spanningŌĆØ refers to the requirement that the (d ŌłÆ1)-skeleton of F equals that of X, just as a spanning subgraph of a graph G is a subgraph that includes all vertices. From a homological perspective, an equivalent condition for X to be a d-forest is that Hd(X;R) = 0, because Hd(XŌēżd;R) = kerŌłéd(X).

- De’¼ünition 2.6. A d-dimensional cell complex X is a d-tree if the columns of Ōłéd(X) are linearly independent and rankŌłéd(X) = nullityŌłédŌłÆ1(X). A spanning d-tree of X is a d-tree T ŌŖå X such that TŌēżdŌłÆ1 = XŌēżdŌłÆ1.


Equivalently, X is a tree if Hd(X;R) = HdŌłÆ1(X;R) = 0.

Note that every cell complex has at least one spanning forest (since its boundary matrix has at least one column basis), but a spanning forest of X is a spanning tree if and only if HdŌłÆ1(X;R) = 0. In general, the conditions Hd(X;R) = 0 and HdŌłÆ1(X;R) = 0 should be regarded as the analogues of acyclicity and connectedness for a d-dimensional cell complex. Thus De’¼ünitions 2.5 and 2.6 say that d-forests and d-trees are respectively ŌĆ£d-acyclicŌĆØ and ŌĆ£d-acyclic and d-connectedŌĆØ cell complexes.

What do cellular trees and forests look like? A 1-dimensional forest is a graph that contains no cycles (subgraphs homeomorphic to a circle) and a 1-dimensional tree contains no cycles and is connected (i.e., every pair of vertices can be seen as the endpoints of some 1-dimensional path). Correspondingly, a 2-dimensional cell complex X is a forest if X contains no subcomplex homeomorphic to a compact oriented 2-manifold. Imagine a 2-dimensional cell complex as a network of bubbles: in order to make it into a forest, one must remove enough 2-cells to pop all the bubbles, without removing any lower-dimensional cells. Furthermore, X is a 2-tree if every 1-cycle is the boundary of some disk consisting of 2-cells. De’¼ünitions 2.5 and 2.6 make sense even when d = 0: a 0-dimensional forest is any set of vertices, and a 0-dimensional tree is just a single vertex, which is a 0-spanning tree of X if and only if XŌēż1 is a connected graph.

- Example 2.7. Figure 1 shows three 2-dimensional simplicial trees. Complex (a) is a triangulation of the disk whose dual graph is a tree. Complex (b) is also a triangulation of the disk, but the dual graph forms a cycle, so it is a 2-tree with no ŌĆ£leafŌĆØ. Complex (c) is a contractible simplicial complex (hence a tree) with facets 123, 124, 134, 125, 135. It is a spanning tree of the equatorial bipyramid.

(a) (b)

2 1

3 4

5

(c)

- Fig. 1 Some two-dimensional trees.


- Example 2.8. If Xd is homeomorphic to a compact oriented manifold (such as a d-


sphere) then ╬▓d(X) = 1, and the kernel of Ōłéd is one-dimensional, generated by a linear relation that involves all its columns nontrivially. Informally, X has exactly one bubble, and it can be popped by removing any facet. Deleting subsequent facets pokes extra holes in the surface. Hence any spanning subcomplex obtained from X by removing one facet (resp., one or more facets) is a maximal spanning forest (resp., a spanning forest).

- Example 2.9. Consider the equatorial bipyramid B of Example 2.3. Topologically, it

is a ŌĆ£double bubbleŌĆØ, recorded homologically by its second Betti number ╬▓2(B) = 2. In order to pop both bubbles, we can remove either (a) two triangles, one containing vertex 4 and one containing vertex 5, or (b) the middle triangle 123 plus any other triangle. Thus B has a total of (3 ├Ś 3) + 6 = 15 spanning trees, all of which are contractible simplicial complexes with 5 facets. See Figure 1(c) and Example 2.7 for one example.

- Example 2.10. Figure 2 shows two 2-dimensional simplicial forests, which triangu-

late the annulus and the M┬©obius band. In both cases ╬▓2 = 0 but ╬▓1 = 1 > 0 (since neither complex is simply connected), so each complex has itself as a spanning 2forest, but has no spanning tree ŌĆö just like a non-connected acyclic graph. On the other hand, unlike a 1-dimensional forest, neither complex is the disjoint union of 2-trees.

(a)

| | | |
|---|---|---|


(b)

- Fig. 2 Two-dimensional forests.


The connectedness condition HdŌłÆ1(X;R) = 0 does not preclude the existence of torsion. Suppose that we regard the boundary matrix Ōłék as a map on Z-modules ŌłékZ : ZXk ŌåÆ ZXkŌłÆ1 (rather than on R-vector spaces), and accordingly work with the integer homology groups Hk(X;Z) = kerŌłékZ/imŌłékZ+1. While working over Z does not change the ranks of the matrices, the condition rankŌłéd(X) = nullityŌłédŌłÆ1(X) no longer implies that HdŌłÆ1(X;Z) is the trivial group, merely that it is ’¼ünite. This subtlety is concealed in the graph case d = 1, since it is a fact that H0(X;Z) is free abelian for any space X, but is of central importance in higher dimension.

- Example 2.11. While every tree graph is a contractible topological space, this is not always true in higher dimension. The simplest example is the real projective plane. In the standard cell structure on RP2 described in Example 2.4, imŌłé2 = 2R = kerŌłé1(X). So H1(RP2;R) = 0 and RP2 is a 2-tree (hence the only spanning 2-tree of itself). On the other hand, H1(RP2;Z) Ōł╝= Z/2Z = 0, so RP2 is not contractible. In the triangulation of RP2 shown in Figure 3, the cycle consisting of edges 12, 13, and 23 is a representative of the non-trivial torsion homology class.
- Example 2.12. Let K6,2 be the 2-dimensional skeleton of the 6-vertex simplex, i.e., the 2-dimensional simplicial complex on vertex set V = [6] whose facets are the twenty 3-element subsets of V. Let T1 be the spanning subcomplex of K6,2 whose


facets are the ten 3-element sets containing v1. Then T1 is contractible (it is a cone), hence is a simplicial spanning tree of K6,2 with H1(T1;Z) = 0. On the other hand, RP2 can be triangulated with six vertices (as in Figure 3), and any such triangulation T2 is also a spanning tree of K6,2, with H1(T2;Z) Ōł╝= Z/2Z.

1

- 2

- 3


2

5

4 6

3

1

- Fig. 3 The triangulation of the real projective plane is a 2-tree with non-trivial torsion.


Just as deleting an edge from a graph either decrements the cyclomatic number or increments the number of components, deleting facets of a simplicial complex Xd either decrements ╬▓d or increments ╬▓dŌłÆ1. Thus a d-forest is a subcomplex T ŌŖé X obtained by removing enough facets so that ╬▓d(T) = 0, and a maximal d-forest is one in which no facets have been removed unnecessarily, so that ╬▓dŌłÆ1(T) = ╬▓dŌłÆ1(X). If in addition ╬▓dŌłÆ1(X) = 0, then T is a spanning tree. Thus the vanishing of ╬▓d(T) and ╬▓dŌłÆ1(T) are the higher-dimensional analogues of the graph-theoretic concepts of acyclicity and connectedness respectively.

The number of facets of every maximal d-forest T ŌŖå X is |Td| = |Xd|ŌłÆ╬▓d(X), which is the analogue of the statement that a maximal spanning forest of a graph with n vertices and c components has nŌłÆc edges.

This discussion leads to the following characterizations of cellular spanning forests and trees, which generalize most of the conditions of De’¼ünition 2.1.

Proposition 2.13. Let X be a cell complex of dimension d and let T contain all faces of dimension (d ŌłÆ1) or less of X. Then T is a maximal spanning forest of X if it satis’¼ües any of the following equivalent properties:

- (a) ╬▓d(T) = 0 and ╬▓dŌłÆ1(T) = ╬▓dŌłÆ1(X).
- (b) ╬▓dŌłÆ1(T) = ╬▓dŌłÆ1(X) and |Td| = |Xd|ŌłÆ╬▓d(X).
- (c) ╬▓d(T) = 0 and |Td| = |Xd|ŌłÆ╬▓d(X).
- (d) Every element of kerŌłédŌłÆ1(X,T) is the boundary of exactly one d-chain in T.
- (e) T is maximal among the spanning subcomplexes of X with ╬▓d(T) = 0.
- (f) T is minimal among the spanning subcomplexes of X with ╬▓dŌłÆ1(T) = ╬▓dŌłÆ1(X).
- (g) The columns of Ōłéd(T) are a vector space basis for colspaceŌłéd(X). Meanwhile, T is a spanning forest (not necessarily maximal) if
- (h) ╬▓d(T) = 0.
- (i) Every element of kerŌłédŌłÆ1(X,T) is the boundary of at most one d-chain in T.


- (j) The columns of Ōłéd(T) are linearly independent.


- A maximal spanning forest is a spanning tree when ╬▓dŌłÆ1(X) = 0. In this case kerŌłédŌłÆ1(X,T) becomes kerŌłédŌłÆ1(X) in (d) and (i).


When d = 1, these properties reduce to the familiar equivalent de’¼ünitions of trees and forests given in De’¼ünition 2.1, letter by letter. One condition that does not carry over to higher dimension is (k) of De’¼ünition 2.1, which de’¼ünes a forest as a graph in which every connected component is a tree, it relies on the fact that the incidence matrix Ōłé1(G) of a graph G breaks up as a block sum of the incidence matrices of its components, of which there are ╬▓0(G) + 1. On the other hand, there is no canonical way to decompose a d-dimensional cell complex X, or the matrix Ōłéd(X), into ╬▓dŌłÆ1(X)+1 pieces. Hence, d-forests are not simply disjoint unions of d-trees, as in the annulus and M┬©obius band of Example 2.10.

Remark 2.14. If T ŌŖå X is a spanning tree, then there is a surjection of ’¼ünite groups HdŌłÆ1(T;Z) ŌåÆ HdŌłÆ1(X;Z). In particular, if X has a Z-acyclic spanning tree then HdŌłÆ1(X;Z) = 0, but the converse does not hold. For example, consider a cell complex with top boundary map p q for any relatively prime integers p,q > 1.

##### 2.4 Rooted trees and forests

What is the higher-dimensional analogue of a rooted tree or forest? In dimension 1, a root of a tree graph is a vertex, while a root of a forest graph is a choice of a vertex from each connected component. As before, in order to generalize these concepts to arbitrary dimension, we ’¼ürst state them in terms of linear algebra. It is a standard fact that the nullvectors of a graph G are just the characteristic vectors of its connected components; therefore, a root of a maximal spanning forest of G can be regarded as the complement of a column basis of ŌłéG, which motivates the following de’¼ünition.

- De’¼ünition 2.15. Let X be a d-dimensional cell complex. A rooted spanning forest of X is a pair (F,R), where F is a spanning forest of X; R is a (d ŌłÆ1)-dimensional subcomplex of X such that RŌēżdŌłÆ2 = XŌēżdŌłÆ2; and ŌłéX\R,F is square and nonsingular, where ŌłéX\R,F is the submatrix of Ōłéd(X) with rows X \R and columns F.


Figure 4 shows rootings of some of the 2-trees encountered previously: the triangulations of the 2-disk (a,b), the projective plane (c), and the annulus (d). The roots are the 1-dimensional subcomplexes indicated with thick lines. In the ’¼ürst three cases ╬▓2(X) = 0, so a root of X is simply a spanning tree of the codimension1 skeleton. The annulus has ╬▓1 = 1, and its root is a unicyclic graph rather than a spanning 1-tree.

In the case that (F,R) is a maximal rooted spanning forest, the root R was called a ŌĆ£relatively acyclic complexŌĆØ in [DKM15], because the inclusion map R ŌåÆ X induces isomorphisms Hi(R;R) ŌåÆ Hi(X;R) for all i < d, a condition equivalent to the vanishing of the relative homology groups Hi(X,R;R) for all i < d. Lyons [Lyo09]

1

- 2

- 3


2

5

4 6

3

(a) (b) (c) 1

(d)

- Fig. 4 Rooted trees and forests.

used the term ŌĆ£cobaseŌĆØ for the complement of a root, referring to the fact that a i-cobase is a row basis for the coboundary map ŌłéiŌłŚ+1.

- De’¼ünition 2.16. Let X be a d-dimensional cell complex. A directed rooted spanning forest of X is a triple (F,R,O) where (F,R) is a rooted spanning forest of X,


and O : XdŌłÆ1 \RdŌłÆ1 ŌåÆ Fd is a bijection such that Žü ŌŖé O(Žü) for all f. That is, O pairs each codimension-1 face Žü  Ōłł R with a facet that contains it.

When d = 1, this formalism regards an oriented edge u ŌåÆ v not as an ordered pair of vertices, but as the pairing of vertex u with edge uv. It is a standard fact that every rooting of a tree graph induces a unique orientation of its edges so that each edge is directed towards the root. In higher dimensions, a root can admit more than one orientation; this subject is discussed more fully in ┬¦5.3.

- Example 2.17. The rooted trees (a), (b) and (d) in Figure 4 each induce a unique orientation. The rooting of RP2 shown in (c) induces two distinct orientations: for example, edge 23 can be paired with either triangle 236 or triangle 234. See Figure 5.


In general, the number of valid orientations is at least |HdŌłÆ1(Y;Z)|, where Y is the relative complex (F,R), but equality need not hold, as shown by Bernardi and Klivans [BK].

1

1

5

- 2

- 3


3

2

4 6

1

1

5

- 2

- 3


3

2

4 6

- Fig. 5 Two orientations of the rooted spanning tree of RP2 shown in Fig. 4 (c).


##### 2.5 Other formulations of higher-dimensional trees

The de’¼ünition of a d-forest ’¼üts naturally into matroid theory (for a general reference, see, e.g., [Oxl11]). The dth cellular matroid of a cell complex X is the matroid Md(X) represented over R by the columns of Ōłéd(X). This is an extension of the de’¼ünition of a simplicial matroid; see [CL87]. Proposition 2.13 then asserts that the spanning d-forests of X are precisely the independent sets in Md(X), and the maximal spanning forests are its bases. For a graph, this approach would de’¼üne spanning trees as the bases of the graphical matroid.

Higher-dimensional trees originate in the work of Bolker [Bol76], Kalai [Kal83] and Adin [Adi92], who studied spanning trees of skeletons of simplices and joins of 0-dimensional complexes, respectively. The foregoing de’¼ünitions, in varying generality and essentially equivalent but for terminological differences, were formulated by Duval, Klivans and Martin [DKM09, DKM11, DKM15], Lyons [Lyo09], and Petersson [Pet09]. The present de’¼ünition of a maximal spanning forest of a cell complex X matches the de’¼ünition of ŌĆ£spanning treeŌĆØ given by Petersson [Pet09, Defn. 3.13]. In addition, Petersson [Pet09, Defn. 3.14] de’¼üned a pure connected complex to be a tree if its top homology vanishes (i.e., if it is a forest according to De’¼ünition 2.5); by contrast, here De’¼ünition 2.6 emphasizes that the higherdimensional analogue of connectedness is the vanishing of codimension-1 homology. Lyons [Lyo09] did not use the terms ŌĆ£treeŌĆØ and ŌĆ£forest,ŌĆØ instead using matroid terminology.

The literature contains many other generalizations of trees to higher dimension: see, e.g., [BP71, Dew74, Far02, HLM99, MV02, BPT15]. In general these do not have the same topological properties as the cellular trees considered here, but are de’¼üned so as to extend other useful properties of trees. For instance, FaridiŌĆÖs de’¼ünition [Far02] extends the recursive description of a tree as a graph formed from a smaller tree by attaching a leaf. FaridiŌĆÖs trees are simplicial complexes whose dual graphs are trees (such as the ’¼ürst, but not the second, tree in Figure 1); the presence of a leaf is important in the study of their facet ideals. In another direction, Masbaum and Vaintrob [MV02] studied 3-uniform hypergraphs (which can be regarded as pure 2-dimensional simplicial complexes) and found a Pfaf’¼üan matrix-tree theorem enumerating their spanning trees.

##### 3 Enumerating spanning trees and forests

This section will be somewhat more technical and algebraic, with the goal of giving precise statements of the various forms of the cellular matrix-tree theorem that have appeared in the literature and explaining how they are interrelated.

##### 3.1 The classical matrix-tree theorem

Let G = (V,E) be a loopless graph with n = |V| and m = |E|. Let e(v,w) denote the number of edges between vertices i and j, let degG(i) be the degree of i, and let Ōłé be the signed incidence matrix of G (choosing an arbitrary orientation). The Laplacian matrix of G is L(G) = ŌłéŌłéT. Explicitly, L(G) = [ ij]ni,j=1, where

degG(i) if i = j, ŌłÆe(i, j) if i = j.

ij =

The matrix-tree theorem enumerates spanning trees of a graph using its Laplacian matrix. Theorem 3.1 (Matrix-Tree Theorem). Let G be a connected graph, let T (G) be its set of spanning trees, and let Žä(G) = |T (G)|. Then

╬╗1┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę╬╗nŌłÆ1 n

Žä(G) =

(6)

where the ╬╗i are the non-zero eigenvalues of L(G). Alternatively, for any i, j, Žä(G) = detL╦£ (7)

where L╦£ is the reduced Laplacian obtained by deleting the ith row and column for some vertex i (the choice of i does not matter).

The theorem can be proved by expanding the Laplacian or reduced Laplacian using the Binet-Cauchy formula and observing that the non-vanishing terms correspond exactly to spanning trees. It is also possible to prove (7) using the deletion/contraction recurrence for Žä(G).

Corollary 3.2. Let G be any graph (not necessarily connected), let T (G) be its set of maximal spanning forests, and let Žä(G) = |T (G)|. Suppose that G has nonzero Laplacian eigenvalues ╬╗1,...,╬╗nŌłÆc and connected components G1,...,Gc of orders n1,...,nc. Then

╬╗1┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę╬╗nŌłÆc n1┬Ę┬Ę┬Ęnc

Žä(G) =

= detLS (8)

where LS is the (nŌłÆc)├Ś(nŌłÆc) matrix obtained by choosing a vertex in each Gi and deleting the corresponding c rows and columns from L. Moreover, the number of rooted forests of G is simply the product of the nonzero eigenvalues of L(G).

Indeed, L(G) is the block-diagonal sum L(G1)ŌŖĢ┬Ę┬Ę┬ĘŌŖĢL(Gc), so its spectrum is the multiset union of their spectra. Meanwhile, a maximal spanning forest of L(G) is just the union of a spanning tree of each component, and the denominator in (8) is the number of possible choices of roots (since a root consists of a vertex chosen from each component of the graph).

Let w = {we} be a family of commuting indeterminates indexed by the edges of Kn. Let G be a graph on [n] and set we = 0 if e  Ōłł E(G). The weighted Laplacian matrix of G is L(G;w) = [╦å i,j]ni,j=1, where

Ōłæk =iwik if i = j, ŌłÆwij if i = j.

╦å ij =

The matrix-tree theorem may be extended to the weighted case, producing polynomial tree enumerators that carry ’¼üner combinatorial meaning. For example, let x1,...,xn be indeterminates corresponding to the vertices of G and set wij = xixj. Then the ŌĆ£Cayley-Pr┬©uferŌĆØ weighted enumeration formula is

n

#### Ōłæ

#### ŌłÅ

i=1

TŌłłT (Kn)

xidegT(i) = x1┬Ę┬Ę┬Ęxn(x1 +┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę+xn)nŌłÆ2. (9)

##### 3.2 Extending the matrix-tree theorem to arbitrary cell complexes

The maximal spanning forests of a cell complex can be enumerated using a higherdimensional analogue of the matrix-tree theorem. As described above, this idea originated with Kalai [Kal83] and Adin [Adi92] and was extended further by others [CCK12, DKM09, DKM11, DKM15, Lyo09, Pet09].

Throughout, let X be a d-dimensional pure cell complex. Recall that the kth boundary map Ōłék : RXk ŌåÆ RXkŌłÆ1 may be regarded as the incidence matrix from k-cells to (kŌłÆ1)-cells. Its adjoint map is the kth coboundary map ŌłékŌłŚ, which may be regarded as the transpose [ŌłékŌłŚ] = [Ōłék]T. The kth up-down, down-up, and total Laplacians are respectively

Lkud(X) = Ōłék+1ŌłékŌłŚ+1, Lkdu(X) = ŌłékŌłŚŌłék, Lktot(X) = Lkud +Lkdu,

all of which may be viewed either as linear operators on RXk, or equivalently as square matrices of size |Xk|. They are all real, diagonalizable, positive semi-de’¼ünite matrices. The spectrum of Lktot(X) is the multiset union of the spectra of Lkud(X) and Lkdu(X) (because the up-down and down-up Laplacians annihilate each other). Moreover, the spectra of Lkud(X) and Lkdu+1(X) coincide up to the multiplicity of the zero eigenvalue. Therefore, the spectra of any of the families {Lkud(X)}, {Lkdu(X)}, {Lktot(X)} determines the spectra of the other two. The results here are primarily phrased in terms of the up-down Laplacian, so we abbreviate Lkud(X) by Lk(X), or simply Lk when the complex X is clear from the context.

Higher-dimensional tree and forest enumeration requires keeping track of torsion. Accordingly, let Tor(A) denote the torsion summand of a ’¼ünitely generated abelian group A, and de’¼üne

###### tk(X) = |Tor(Hk(X;Z))|.

We extend this notation: if S is any set of cells of X, we set tk(S) = |Tor(Hk(XS;Z))|, where XS is the subcomplex generated by S.

Let Tk(X) denote the set of maximal spanning k-forests in X. As in (4) above, the kth forest count of X is

Žäk(X)= Ōłæ

tk(T)2.

TŌłłTk(X)

Note that when HkŌłÆ1(X;R) = 0 (i.e., the spanning forests are spanning trees), we have tk(T) = |Tor(Hk(T;Z))| = |Hk(T;Z)| for each T. Moreover, when X = G is a graph, every summand t0(T)2 is 1, so Žä1(G) is just the number of maximal spanning forests.

##### 3.3 Weightings

As for graphs, one can study weighted analogues of Žä(X) in order to obtain more re’¼üned information about its spanning trees and forests.

Let w = {wF | F Ōłł X} be a family of commuting indeterminates indexed by the faces of X. The weighted forest enumerator of X is de’¼üned as

Žä(X;w)=Žäk(X;w) def= Ōłæ

tkŌłÆ1(T)2 ŌłÅ

wF. (10)

FŌłłT

TŌłłTk(X)

When X is a simplicial complex, we frequently work with variables vi indexed by the vertices of X, and set wŽā = ŌłÅiŌłłŽā vi for every face Žā. We will refer to this weighting as the vertex weighting for X, and denote it by v throughout.

Let Dk denote the diagonal matrix with entries (wŽā : Žā Ōłł Xk). As in [CCK12,

DKM11], one can de’¼üne1 a ŌĆ£combinatorialŌĆØ weighted boundary map ŌłékDk1/2, giving rise to the weighted Laplacian

LkŌłÆ1(X;w) = Ōłék Dk ŌłékŌłŚ. (11)

Note that the combinatorial weighted boundary maps do not form a chain complex. Another approach [ADM, MMRW15, KL15b] is to de’¼üne the weighted boundary

map as DŌłÆkŌłÆ11/2ŌłékD1k/2. These weighted boundaries do give rise to a chain complex, and to the ŌĆ£algebraicŌĆØ weighted Laplacian:

LkalgŌłÆ1(X;w) = DŌłÆkŌłÆ11/2Ōłék Dk ŌłékŌłŚDkŌłÆŌłÆ11/2. (12)

- 1 This weighted boundary was de’¼üned as ŌłékDk in [DKM11]. Here we adopt the equivalent convention of [CCK12] in order to eliminate squares on the indeterminates in weighted enumerators.


##### 3.4 Cellular matrix-forest formulas

The forest counts of a cell complex X can be computed from the spectra of its Laplacians. This relationship appears in several different forms in the literature, all of which share the same underlying principle. We refer to these results collectively as cellular matrix-forest theorems.

The relationship between forest counts and the Laplacian becomes simplest when certain rational homology groups of X vanish. In [DKM09, DKM11] it was assumed that X was R-acyclic in positive codimension (R-APC), i.e., that Hk(X;R) = 0 for all k < d. This requirement is not necessary and so we weaken the hypotheses slightly. In fact, many complexes of combinatorial interest satisfy a stronger condition: they are Z-acyclic in positive codimension (Z-APC), i.e., Hk(X;Z) = 0 for all

- k < dimX.


For S ŌŖå Xk, the notation LS indicates the square submatrix of Lk(X) restricted to rows and columns indexed by the cells in S. De’¼üne the pseudodeterminant ╬╗(M) of any square matrix M to be the product of its nonzero eigenvalues.

###### Theorem 3.3 (Cellular-Matrix Forest Theorem). Let Xd be a cell complex with

- HdŌłÆ1(X;R) = HdŌłÆ2(X;R) = 0. Let R Ōłł TdŌłÆ1(X) and S = XdŌłÆ1 \RdŌłÆ1. Then


tdŌłÆ2(X)2 tdŌłÆ2(R)2

Žäd(X;w) =

det LS(X;w) (13a)

tdŌłÆ2(X)2 ŽädŌłÆ1(X)

╬╗(L(X;w)). (13b)

=

Furthermore, for a general cell complex Xd with root R (see De’¼ünition 2.15),

tdŌłÆ1(X)2 tdŌłÆ1(X,R)2

Žäd(X;w) =

det LS(X;w). (13c)

These three formulas are respectively [DKM09, Thm. 1.4], [DKM11, Thm. 2.8], and [DKM15, Prop. 3.5].2 In simple terms, (13a) and (13c) state that the forest counts of a complex can be computed from its reduced combinatorial Laplacian, and (13b) states that the forest counts can be computed via a product of eigenvalues of the combinatorial Laplacian.

When X is Z-APC, the correction factors in Theorem 3.3 (e.g., tdŌłÆ1(X)) are equal to 1 and therefore may be omitted.

- Example 3.4. Let X be the equatorial bipyramid of Example 2.3; this complex is Z-APC. Let R be the root consisting of all edges that contain vertex 1. Then Theorem 3.3 states that the number of spanning trees equals the determinant of the 5├Ś5 reduced Laplacian formed by removing all rows and columns corresponding to edges in R; this determinant is 15.


- 2 There is a slight notational error in [DKM15], where the L╬ō in Prop. 3.5 should refer to the reduced Laplacian formed by removing the rows and columns corresponding to cells of ╬ō.


The formula (13b) can be iterated to obtain a closed-form expression for the tree count as an alternating product [DKM11, Cor. 2.10]. For simplicity, we state only the Z-APC case.

Corollary 3.5. Suppose that Hk(X;Z) = 0 for all k < d. Then

Žäd(X) =

d

#### ŌłÅ

╬╗(LiŌłÆ1)(ŌłÆ1)dŌłÆi. (14)

i=0

Example 3.6. Let X be the triangulation of the projective plane as given in Figure 3. The pseudodeterminants ╬╗i = ╬╗(Li) of its various Laplacians are:

ŌłÜ5)3(3ŌłÆ

ŌłÜ5)3 = 3443, ╬╗1 = 65, ╬╗0 = 6. Hence Žä2(X) = ╬╗2╬╗0/╬╗1 = 4.

╬╗2 = 34(3+

The right-hand side of Equation 14 is essentially the R-torsion (or Reidemeister torsion) of X with respect to the bases of the chain groups given by cells, in the sense of Milnor [Mil66, ┬¦8]. Catanzaro, Chernyak and Klein showed more generally [CCK12, Thm. F] that the square of the R-torsion is the quantity

(ŌłÆ1)k

covolHk(X;Z)covolBk(X;Z) tk(X)2

#### ŌłÅ

Žäk+1(X)

kŌēź0

where Bk(X;Z) = imŌłék+1(X).

Catanzaro, Chernyak and Klein [CCK12] obtained a closely related determinant formula for Žäd(X) in terms of the restriction LB of LdŌłÆ1(X) to the space

- B = BdŌłÆ1 = imŌłédŌłÆ1(X) (which is invariant under the action of LdŌłÆ1). For a lattice (discrete subgroup) L ŌŖé Rn, de’¼üne its covolume, covolL , to be the volume of the parallelotope spanned by any (hence every) set of lattice generators. Then:


- Theorem 3.7 (Cellular Matrix-Forest Theorem, covolume expansion). [CCK12, Thms. C and D]


tdŌłÆ1(X)2 (covolB)2

Žäd(X;w) =

detLB(X;w).

Theorems 3.3 and 3.7 are very close in spirit. Both express the torsion-weighted tree counts of X in terms of determinants of reduced Laplacians. Theorem 3.3 is useful in combinatorial applications, particularly where there is a natural choice of root R (such as when X is a shifted simplicial complex; see ┬¦4.3 below). Theorem 3.7 is less combinatorial but has the advantage of expressing Žä(X) purely in terms of invariants of X, with no choice required.

Lyons [Lyo09] gave another general formula for Žäk(X) (which he denoted by hkŌłÆ1(X)) without the requirements that ╬▓dŌłÆ1(X) = ╬▓dŌłÆ2(X) = 0. For a set of kcells S ŌŖå Xk, let t k(S) denote the size of the group (kerZŌłék)/((kerZŌłék Ōł®imQŌłék+1)+ kerZ(Ōłék|Xk\S)), and de’¼üne a torsion-weighted enumerator for cobases by

h k(X)= Ōłæ

tk(Xk+1 \S)t k(S)2. (15)

(k+1)-cobases S

- Theorem 3.8 (Cellular Matrix-Forest Theorem, cobase expansion). [Lyo09, Prop. 6.2] Let S be a (d ŌłÆ1)-cobase of X, i.e., the complement of a (d ŌłÆ1)-root R. Then

Žäd(X) =

tdŌłÆ2(X)2 tdŌłÆ2(R)2t dŌłÆ1(S)2

detLS(X) (16a)

=

tdŌłÆ2(X)2 h dŌłÆ2(X)

╬╗(L(X)). (16b)

When HdŌłÆ1(X;R) = HdŌłÆ2(X;R) = 0, these formulas reduce to (13b) and (13b) respectively.

The algebraic weighting (12) can be used to obtain a slightly different matrixforest formula. Versions of the following result appear in Aalipour, Duval and Martin [ADM], Kook and Lee [KL15b, Thm. 4] and Martin, Maxwell, Reiner and Wilson [MMRW15, Thm. 5.3].

- Theorem 3.9 (Cellular Matrix-Forest Theorem with algebraic weighting). Let X be a cell complex of dimension d with weighting w, and suppose that HdŌłÆ1(X;R) =


- HdŌłÆ2(X;R) = 0. Let LdalgŌłÆ1(X) denote the algebraically weighted Laplacian of X as de’¼üned in (12). Then


tdŌłÆ2(X)2 ŽädŌłÆ1(X;w)

╬╗(LdalgŌłÆ1(X)) ŌłÅ

Žäd(X;w) =

wŽā. (17)

ŽāŌłłXdŌłÆ1

The index d may be replaced with any k for which HkŌłÆ1(X;R) = HkŌłÆ2(X;R) = 0. Observe that setting all the weights wi to 1 recovers (13b).

Just as iterating (13b) gives (14), iterating Theorem 3.9 yields an alternating product formula for weighted tree enumerators. For simplicity, we state only the Z-APC case.

Corollary 3.10. Suppose that X is Z-APC of dimension d, i.e., Hi(X;Z) = 0 for all i < dimX. Then

(wŽā)(ŌłÆ1)dŌłÆdimŽāŌłÆ1

Žäd(X;w)= ŌłÅ

ŽāŌłłX dimŽā<d

dŌłÆ1

#### ŌłÅ

╬╗(Lkalg(X))(ŌłÆ1)dŌłÆkŌłÆ1.

k=ŌłÆ1

It is also possible to enumerate rooted forests in terms of products of Laplacian eigenvalues, as observed by Bernardi and Klivans.

Theorem 3.11 (Rooted Cellular Matrix-Forest Theorem). [BK] Let X be a ddimensional cell complex. Then the characteristic polynomial of the Laplacian Ld(X) gives a generating function for the rooted forests of X:

#### Ōłæ

tdŌłÆ1(X,R)2z|R| = det(Ld(X)+z┬ĘId). (18)

(F,R)

Here Id is the identity matrix with rows and columns indexed by XdŌłÆ1. The result may also be extended to include indeterminate weights on the faces of the forest and root; see [BK, Thm. 18] and [MMRW15, Prop. 2.1].

##### 4 Enumeration of trees for speci’¼üc complexes

We next describe how the theorems of Section 3 have been used to obtain enumerative results for several families of cell complexes. In each case we have provided the full statements of the tree enumeration formulas but refer the reader to the references throughout for detailed treatments of these results.

##### 4.1 Skeletons of simplices

Fix integers n > d Ōēź 0, and letV = [n] = {1,2,...,n}. The complete d-dimensional complex on n vertices is the simplicial complex

Ōłå = Ōłån,d = {Žā ŌŖå V | dimŽā Ōēż d}.

Equivalently, Ōłå is the d-dimensional skeleton of the simplex on vertices [n]. The complex Ōłå is Z-APC, with top Betti number d nŌłÆ+11 .

Kalai [Kal83, Thm. 1] proved that

Žäd(Ōłån,d) = n(nŌłÆd2) (19)

con’¼ürming BolkerŌĆÖs [Bol76] guess that this formula was correct and generalizing CayleyŌĆÖs formula Žä(Kn) = nnŌłÆ2. As described in ┬¦1.2, KalaiŌĆÖs crucial observation was that the invariant Žäd is the right way to enumerate higher-dimensional trees. The actual number of spanning trees probably does not have a closed-form expression; it deviates from KalaiŌĆÖs formula ’¼ürst when n = 6 and d = 2, since the real projective plane can be triangulated with six vertices; see Example 2.12. To obtain formula (19), Kalai showed that the eigenvalues of the reduced Laplacian are 1 (with multiplicity d nŌłÆŌłÆ21 ) and n (with multiplicity nŌłÆd2 ), from which (19) follows immediately.

The weighted Cayley-Pr┬©ufer formula (9) also extends nicely to higher dimensions. Kalai [Kal83, Thm. 3 ] proved that

Žäd(Ōłån,d;v) = (v1v2┬Ę┬Ę┬Ęvn)(dnŌłÆŌłÆ21)(v1 +v2 +┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę+vn)(nŌłÆd2) (20)

where v is the vertex weighting. It is an open problem to give a bijective proof of this formula. It is not clear how to extend the Pr┬©ufer code or JoyalŌĆÖs bijection to arbitrary dimension, or how such a bijection should account for trees with torsion.

##### 4.2 Complete colorful complexes

Let r and n1,...,nr be positive integers, and let V1,...,Vr be pairwise-disjoint vertex sets with |Vi| = ni. The complete colorful complex is the (r ŌłÆ1)-dimensional complex de’¼üned as

Kn1,...,nr = {Žā ŌŖé V1 Ōł¬┬Ę┬Ę┬ĘŌł¬Vr | #(Žā Ōł®Vi) Ōēż 1 ŌłĆi}.

The complexes Kn1,...,nr are natural generalizations of complete bipartite graphs, which arise as the case r = 2. As described in ┬¦1.1, the history of higher-dimensional

trees owes its origins to the appearance of complete colorful complexes in the transportation problems considered by Bolker [Bol76]. The pure full-dimensional subcomplexes of Kn1,...,nr are precisely the balanced simplicial complexes, which are signi’¼ücant in combinatorial commutative algebra; see, e.g., [Sta96, pp. 95ŌĆō106].

As observed by Bolker, the complete colorful complex Kn1,...,nr is Z-APC, with top Betti number ŌłÅri=ŌłÆ11(ni ŌłÆ1). Adin [Adi92, Thm. 1.5] gave the following closed formula for their tree counts. For D ŌŖå[r], set ŽāD =ŌłæiŌłł[r]\Dni and ŽĆD =ŌłÅiŌłłD(niŌłÆ1). Then for all 0 Ōēż k Ōēż rŌłÆ1,

(rŌłÆkŌłÆ|2ŌłÆ|DD| |)ŽĆD D . (21)

Žäk(Kn1,...,nr)= ŌłÅ

Žā

DŌŖå[r] |D|Ōēżk

In the special case k = rŌłÆ1, AdinŌĆÖs formula becomes

r

#### ŌłÅ

ŽärŌłÆ1(Kn1,...,nr) =

i=1

ŌłÅ

(njŌłÆ1)

j =i

i . (22)

n

Bolker [Bol76, Thms. 27, 28] observed that (22) gives the exact count of trees if and only if at most two of the niŌĆÖs exceed 2 (because the smallest balanced torsion tree is a 9-vertex triangulation of the real projective plane RP2).

Some additional special cases are worth mentioning. First, setting r = 2 in (22) recovers the formula (3) for the number of spanning trees of a complete bipartite graph. Second, if ni = 1 for all i, then Kn1,...,nr is just the simplex on r vertices, so ŽĆD = 0 for all D except D = 0/, when ŽĆ0/ = 1, and Žā0/ = r, so (21) specializes to KalaiŌĆÖs formula (19). Third, if ni = 2 for all i, then Kn1,...,nr is the boundary of the r-dimensional cross-polytope. Now ŽĆD = 1 for all D and ŽāD = 2(r ŌłÆ|D|), so (21) becomes

k

(2(rŌłÆd))(dr)(rŌłÆkŌłÆ2ŌłÆdd).

#### ŌłÅ

Žäk(K2,2,...,2) =

d=0

We will have more to say about this case in ┬¦4.6 below.

Aalipour, Duval and Martin [ADM, Thm. 5.8] used the weighted matrix-tree theorem (Thm. 3.9) to prove a vertex-weighted version of AdinŌĆÖs formula (21), as follows. Let v = {vj,t | j Ōłł [r], t Ōłł [nj]} be a family of variables indexed by the vertices of Kn1,...,nr. For j Ōłł [r] and 0 Ōēż k Ōēż rŌłÆ1, de’¼üne

nj

nj

vj,t, ek,j = Ōłæ

#### Ōłæ

(ŌłÆ1)kŌłÆ1ŌłÆ|D|ŌłÅ

#### ŌłÅ

nt.

vj,t, sj =

pj =

tŌłłD

t=1

t=1

DŌŖå[r] j ŌłłD, |D|ŌēżkŌłÆ1

Then

(rŌłÆkŌłÆ|2ŌłÆ|DD| |)ŽĆD

r

#### pejk,j ŌłÅ

#### Ōłæ

#### ŌłÅ

Žäk(Kn1,...,nr;v) =

sj

. (23)

j=1

DŌŖå[r] |D|Ōēżk

jŌłł[r]\D

Note that setting all vj,t to 1 specializes pj to 1 and Ōłæj ŌłłDsj to ŽāD, recovering (21).

Complete colorful complexes play a signi’¼ücant role in the theory of cyclotomic matroids, as studied by Martin and Reiner [MR05]. In the irreducible case, Mn is isomorphic to the dual of the simplicial matroid of the complete colorful complex

K(n) := Kp1,...,pr where n is the product of distinct primes p1,..., pr. That is, the bases of the matroid are precisely the complements of the facet sets of spanning trees

of K(n). Musiker and Reiner [MR14] extended this work into a beautiful topological interpretation of the coef’¼ücients of the nth cyclotomic polynomial ╬”n. In particular, Musiker and ReinerŌĆÖs results explain why n = 105 = 3 ┬Ę 5 ┬Ę 7 is the ’¼ürst value for which the coef’¼ücients of ╬”n are not all ┬▒1: it is the smallest n for which the complete colorful complex K(n) contains a spanning tree with torsion. In related work, Beck and Ho┬Ėsten [BH06] studied cyclotomic polytopes, which are dual to the generalized transportation polytopes considered by Bolker, and observed that patterns for their growth series break down for similar reasons involving torsion trees.

##### 4.3 Shifted simplicial complexes

Let Žā = {i0 < ┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę < is} and Žü = {j0 < ┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę < jr} be sets of positive integers, listed in increasing order. Write Žā Žü if Žā ŌŖå Žü, or if s = r and ik Ōēż jk for every k. This relation is a partial order, called the componentwise order. A simplicial complex Ōłåd is called shifted if its vertices can be labeled 1,...,n so that in each dimension its faces form an order ideal with respect to this order: that is, if Žü Ōłł Ōłå and Žā Žü, then Žā Ōłł Ōłå as well. Shifted complexes are an important class of extremal complexes; every simplicial complex can be transformed into a shifted complex in such a way that many combinatorial properties are preserved while the overall structure is sim-

pli’¼üed. A signal success of the study of shifted complexes was the classi’¼ücation of all f-vector/Betti-number pairs for all simplicial complexes, by Bj┬©orner and Kalai [BK88]. Shifted complexes of dimension 1 are known as threshold graphs and have generated much study in their own right; see [MP95].

The homology groups of a shifted complex Ōłå are free abelian; the Betti number ╬▓k(Ōłå) is the number of facets of Ōłå of dimension k not containing vertex 1. To see this, observe that contracting the subcomplex S = starŌłå(1) produces a wedge of spheres, one for each facet not containing vertex 1. In particular, if Ōłå is pure then it is Z-APC, and S is a Z-acyclic spanning tree. For the remainder of this section, we assume that Ōłå is pure of dimension d on vertex set [n].

Duval and Reiner [DR02] showed that shifted simplicial complexes are Laplacian integral. Speci’¼ücally, let degŌłå(i) denote the number of facets containing vertex i, so that (degŌłå(1),...,degŌłå(n)) is a partition. Then the conjugate (transpose) partition is precisely the spectrum of the top-dimensional Laplacian LdŌłÆ1(Ōłå), up to the multiplicity of the zero eigenvalue. This generalizes the corresponding result for threshold graphs, ’¼ürst observed by Hammer and Kelmans [HK96, Thm. 5.3] and stated in this form by Merris [Mer94].

Weighted enumerators for spanning trees of threshold graphs were calculated by Martin and Reiner [MR03, ┬¦6], and can be deduced as a special case of a more general bijective result of Remmel and Williamson [RW02, Thm. 2.4]. Weighted tree enumeration for pure shifted complexes was studied by Duval, Klivans and Martin [DKM09], as we now summarize. Introduce doubly-indexed indeterminates w = {wi,j | 0 Ōēż i Ōēż d, 1 Ōēż j Ōēż n} and for each face Žā = {a0 < ┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę < ak}, set wŽā = ŌłÅki=0wi,ai. In other words, wŽā records not just which vertices occur in Žā, but their order within Žā. Theorem 1.5 of [DKM09] states that the eigenvalues of the weighted Laplacian Lk(Ōłå;w) are polynomials in the weights, so that setting all weights to 1 gives an explicit proof of Laplacian integrality for shifted complexes. Speci’¼ücally, the eigenvalues are in bijection with critical pairs of Ōłå: pairs (Žā,Žü) of (k + 1)-sets of vertices such that Žā Ōłł Ōłå, Žü  Ōłł Ōłå, and Žā is covered by Žü in the componentwise order.

Let ╬ō = {Žü Ōłł Ōłå | 1  Ōłł Žü} and ╬ø = {Žü Ōłł ╬ō | Žü Ōł¬{1} Ōłł Ōłå} denote respectively the deletion and link of vertex 1 (which themselves are shifted complexes). Observe that for every critical pair (Žā,Žü) = ((a0,...,ad),(b0,...,bd)), there is a unique index j for which bj = aj +1 (and bi = ai for all i = j). De’¼üne the signature of (Žā,Žü) to be (S,T), where S = {a0,...,ajŌłÆ1} and T = {1,2,...,aj}. Then [DKM09, Thm. 1.6]

’ŻČ ’ŻĘ ’ŻĖ (24)

### ’Ż½ ’Ż¼ ’ŻŁ ŌłÅ

Ōłæ

wSŌł¬j wSŌł¬{1}

jŌłłTŌł¬{1}

Žäd(Ōłå;w)= ŌłÅ

wFŌł¬{1}

FŌłł╬ødŌłÆ1

(S,T)ŌłłSig(╬ō)

where Sig(╬ō) denotes the set of signatures of critical pairs of ╬ō. The case d = 1 (i.e., Ōłå is a threshold graph) is equivalent to [MR03, Thm. 4]. Specializing wi,j  ŌåÆ vj for every i, j to obtain the vertex weighting v (called the ŌĆ£coarse weightingŌĆØ in [DKM09]) produces the formula

Žäd(Ōłå;v) = v|╬ødŌłÆ1|

1

n

#### ŌłÅ

vdegj ╬ø(j) ŌłÅ

(S,T)ŌłłSig(╬ō)

j=2

#### 1 Ōłæ

vŌłÆ1

vj . (25)

jŌłłTŌł¬{1}

##### 4.4 Color-shifted complexes

As in ┬¦4.2, let K = Kn1,...,nr be the complete colorful complex with vertex set V1 Ōł¬ ┬Ę┬Ę┬ĘŌł¬Vr, where Vi = {vi,1,...,vi,ni}. A subcomplex Ōłå ŌŖå K is called color-shifted if it satis’¼ües the following property:

if Žā = {v1,a1,v2,a2,...,vr,ar} Ōłł Ōłå and 1 Ōēż b < ai, then Žā \{vi,ai}Ōł¬{vi,b} Ōłł Ōłå. (26)

Color-shifted complexes were introduced by Babson and Novik [BN06]. Structurally, color-shifted complexes are to complete colorful complexes as shifted complexes are to simplices. On the other hand, color-shifted complexes (even in dimension 1) are not in general Laplacian integral.

Let G be a color-shifted complex with r = 2, i.e., a graph. Assume that G is connected, and let n = n1, m = n2. For 1 Ōēż i Ōēż n, let ╬╗i = max{j : v1,iv2,j Ōłł E(G)}. Then ╬╗ = (╬╗1,...,╬╗n) is a partition, and it determines G completely: the edges of G correspond to the boxes in the Ferrers diagram of ╬╗, with V1 and V2 corresponding to its rows and columns respectively. For this reason, 1-dimensional colorshifted complexes were studied under the name of Ferrers graphs by Ehrenborg and van Willigenburg, who found an elegant formula for their weighted tree enumerators [EvW04, Thm. 2.1]. Let G = G╬╗ be the Ferrers graph corresponding to a partition ╬╗, and weight the vertices of V1 and V2 by x = {x1,...,xn} and y = {y1,...,ym} respectively. Then

Žä(G╬╗;x,y) = x1┬Ę┬Ę┬Ęxny1┬Ę┬Ę┬Ęym

n

#### ŌłÅ

(y1 +┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę+y╬╗pŌłÆ1)

p=1

m

#### ŌłÅ

(x1 +┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę+x╬╗╦£qŌłÆ1) (27)

q=1

where ╬╗╦£ is the conjugate partition to ╬╗. The proof of this formula in [EvW04] is recursive, proceeding by calculating Žä(G╬╗;x,y)/Žä(G╬╗ ;x,y), where ╬╗ is a partition obtained from ╬╗ by removing a corner of the Ferrers diagram. Another proof, expressing Žä(G╬╗;x,y) in terms of the weighted tree enumerator of a related threshold graph, was given in [DKM09, ┬¦10.3].

For a color-shifted complex Ōłå with r colors, let v = {vq,i} be the vertex weighting, where q Ōłł [r] indexes the colors and i indexes the vertices of each color. Let Ōłå be the subcomplex of Ōłå whose faces are {Žü Ōłł Ōłå | vq,1  Ōłł Žü for any q}. Note that every (r ŌłÆ 2)-face Žā Ōłł Ōłå is missing a unique color m = m(Žā); set k(Žā) = max{j | Žā Ōł¬{xm,i} Ōłł Ōłå}. Aalipour and Duval conjecture [AD] that

ŽärŌłÆ1(Ōłå;v)=ŌłÅ

xqe(,iq,i) ŌłÅ

(xm,1 +┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę+xm,k(Žā)) (28)

q,i

ŽāŌłłŌłå rŌłÆ2

where e(q,i) = #{Žā Ōłł ŌłårŌłÆ1 | xq,i Ōłł Žā and xq ,1 Ōłł Žā for some q = q}. Aalipour and Duval have proven this formula in the case r = 3 (where a color-shifted complex corresponds to a plane partition). It reduces to (27) when r = 2, and to the weighted tree enumerator formula (23) when Ōłå is a complete colorful complex.

Equation (28) resembles formulas (24) and (25) for weighted tree enumerators of shifted complexes. Speci’¼ücally, the ’¼ürst factor on the right-hand side is a product of monomials indexed by faces with vertices numbered 1, and the second factor is a product of sums indexed by faces without vertices numbered 1.

##### 4.5 Matroid complexes

Let M be a matroid on ground set V. The family I (M) of independent sets of M forms a simplicial complex called a matroid complex. These complexes can be characterized in many ways; perhaps the simplest is that a simplicial complex is a matroid complex if and only if every induced subcomplex is pure. Matroid complexes are Cohen-Macaulay and Z-APC. (See Oxley [Oxl11] for a general reference on matroids, and Stanley [Sta96, Chap. III] for facts about matroid complexes.)

Every matroid complex is Laplacian integral. This fact was proved ’¼ürst by Kook, Reiner and Stanton [KRS00], and subsequently generalized by Denham [Den01], who found an explicit eigenbasis for the Laplacian. An expression for Žä(I (M)) can be extracted from DenhamŌĆÖs result (with dif’¼üculty) by applying (13b) or (14). One application of the Kook-Reiner-Stanton formula, given in [DKM11, ┬¦6.1], is an alternate proof of AdinŌĆÖs formula (21), because the complete colorful complex Kn1,...,nr is the independence complex of a direct sum of rank-one uniform matroids.

Kook and Lee [KL15b, KL15a] gave a simpler expression for weighted tree enumerators of matroid complexes. Let ╬▒(M) = TM(0,1), where TM is the Tutte polynomial of M (see [BO92]) and ╬▓(M) = (ŌłÆ1)r(M)ŌłæAŌŖåE(ŌłÆ1)|A|r(A) (the Crapo beta invariant [Cra67], where r is the rank function; see also [Sta07, pp. 447ŌĆō448]). Then

╬▒(F)╬▓(M/F)

ve|T(M/e)|ŌłÆ╬▒(M/e) ŌłÅ

Ōłæ

Žä(I(M);v)= ŌłÅ

ve

eŌłłE

’¼éats F

eŌłłE\F

[KL15b, Thm. 9], where v is the vertex weighting. Consequently,

Žä(I(M))= ŌłÅ

(|E \F|)╬▒(F)╬▓(M/F). (29)

’¼éats F

##### 4.6 Hypercubes

The hypercube Qn is the space [0,1]n ŌŖå Rn, naturally regarded as a cell complex with cells {{0},{1},[0,1]}n. Note that the hypercube is not a simplicial complex,

but it has a tight combinatorial structure that enables enumeration of its spanning trees.

The hypercube is contractible, hence Z-APC. The eigenvalues of L0(Qn,r) are

0,2,...,2j,...,2n, with multiplicities nj ; this can be shown by directly constructing an eigenbasis as in [Sta99, pp. 61ŌĆō62]. Applying formula (6) of the classical

matrix-tree theorem yields the formula

n

k(nk). (30)

Žä1(Qn)=2ŌłÆn ŌłÅ

#### ŌłÅ

2|A| = 22nŌłÆnŌłÆ1

k=2

AŌŖå[n]

This formula was discovered (in greater generality) by Cvetkovi┬┤c [Cve71, (4.10)], using spectral techniques; see also [CDS80, pp. 75, 218]. The ’¼ürst purely combinatorial proof was recently found by Bernardi [Ber12]. A generalization to higher dimension was obtained by Duval, Klivans and Martin in [DKM11, Thm. 3.4], who showed that the nonzero eigenvalues of Lk(Qn) are 2(k + 1),...,2(j + 1),...,2n, with multiplicities jŌłÆk1 nj . Applying the alternating-product formula (14) gives the tree count

n

(2j)(nj)(kjŌłÆŌłÆ21). (31)

#### ŌłÅ

Žäk(Qn) =

j=k+1

Weighted tree enumeration of hypercubes proceeds similarly. Introduce indeterminates {qi,xi,yi | i Ōłł [n]} and weight each face f = (f1,..., fn) Ōłł {{0},{1},[0,1]}n by the monomial

wf = ŌłÅ

#### qi ŌłÅ

#### xi ŌłÅ

yi .

i: fi=0

i: fi=1

i: fi=[0,1]

Now consider the algebraically weighted Laplacian Lkalg(Qn;w) (see (12)) for k Ōēź 0. By [DKM11, Thm. 4.2], its nonzero eigenvalues are the rational functions u(A) =

ŌłæiŌłłAqi/xi + qi/yi, indexed by subsets A ŌŖå [n] with |A| > k, with multiplicities

###### |A|ŌłÆ1

k . Applying the weighted alternating product formula3 (Corollary 3.10) yields

(|AkŌłÆ|ŌłÆ12)

Žäk(Qn;w) = (q1┬Ę┬Ę┬Ęqn)Ōłæni=ŌłÆk1ŌłÆ1(nŌłÆi1)(kiŌłÆŌłÆ12) ŌłÅ

u(A)ŌłÅ

xjyj

(32)

jŌłłA

AŌŖå[n] |A|>k

as conjectured in [DKM11, Conj. 4.3]. For a complete proof of this formula, see [ADM]. The case k = 1 gives the weighted enumerator for spanning trees of cube graphs [MR03, Thm. 3].

- 3 One needs the convention that w/0 = 1, so that LŌłÆalg1(Qn) is just the 1 ├Ś 1 matrix with entry ŌłævŌłłV(Qn)wv = ŌłÅnj=1(xj +yj).


##### 4.7 Duality and self-duality

Let X,Y be cell complexes of dimension d. We say that X and Y are dual if there is an inclusion-reversing bijection Žā  ŌåÆ ŽāŌłŚ between their face posets that induces a duality between their cellular chain complexes. On the level of chain complexes, this means that ŌłéX,k = ŌłéYŌłŚ,dŌłÆk+1 for every k, so4 Lkud(X) = LdduŌłÆk(Y). Indeed, T ŌŖå X is a spanning k-forest in X if and only if TŌł© = {ŽāŌłŚ | Žā Ōłł X \T} is a spanning kforest in Y [DKM11, Prop. 6.1]. Duality carries over to the weighted setting: given a weighting w on X, de’¼üne the dual weighting wŌłŚ on Y by wŌłŚ(ŽāŌłŚ) = w(Žā)ŌłÆ1. Then Lkud(X;w) = Lkdu(Y;wŌłŚ), and likewise for the algebraically weighted Laplacians (see ┬¦3.3). By the weighted cellular matrix-tree theorem (Thm. 3.3), Žäk(X;w) = ŽädŌłÆk(Y;wŌłŚ) for all k. As an application, the (nŌłÆ1)-skeleton of the hypercube Qn is dual to the complete colorful complex K2,2,...,2 (with n 2ŌĆÖs), so the formulas (31) and (32) for spanning tree enumerators of Qn are dual to special cases of (21) and (23) respectively.

- A central re’¼éex is an embedding of a self-dual planar graph G on the sphere S2


so that the isomorphism G ŌåÆ GŌłŚ (where G denotes the planar dual) is realized by the antipodal map on S2. Tutte [Tut79] proved that if G is a central re’¼éex, then Žä(G) is the square of the number of self-dual spanning trees of G. Maxwell [Max09] generalized TutteŌĆÖs result to higher dimension. Say that a matroid on ground set

- E = {e1,...,en,e╦£1,...,e╦£n} is involutively self-dual if it can be represented by an n├Ś2n integer matrix M of the form [I|N], where I is the n├Śn identity matrix and N


is skew-symmetric (so that the ’¼üxed-point free involution E ŌåÆ E given by ei ŌåÉŌåÆ e╦£i gives an isomorphism M ŌåÆ MŌłŚ). If Ōłå is the independence complex of such a matroid (so dimŌłå = d = nŌłÆ1), then [Max09, Thm. 1.3]

2

Žäd(Ōłå)= Ōłæ

tdŌłÆ1(T)2 = Ōłæ

tdŌłÆ1(T)

. (33)

TŌłłTd(Ōłå)

self-dual TŌłłTd(Ōłå)

As an application, let k be a positive integer and let Ōłå be a simplex on vertex

set [2k +2]. Then Žäk(Ōłå2k+2,k) = (2k +2)(2kk) by KalaiŌĆÖs formula (19). The number 2k k is even for all k > 0, so this tree enumerator is a perfect square. The simplicial

matroid of the k-skeleton of Ōłå is involutively self-dual via the map Žā  ŌåÆ [2k+2]\Žā so this perfect square phenomenon is explained by (33).

On the level of weighted tree enumerators, the formula for Žäk(Ōłå2k+2,k;w) given by (20) is a perfect square when n = 2k +2 and k is odd (since in that case kŌłÆ n1 must be even). Maxwell [Max09, Thm. 1.8] proved that this perfect square phenomenon is combinatorial, in the sense that the square root of Žäk(Ōłå2k+2,k;w2) has the combinatorial interpretation one would expect from (33):

- 4 In [DKM11], it was erroneously stated that Lkud(X) = LdudŌłÆk(Y). In fact, duality interchanges updown and down-up Laplacians.


2

tkŌłÆ1(T)2w2T = Ōłæ

#### Ōłæ

tkŌłÆ1(T)wT

###### .

self-dual TŌłłTk(Ōłå)

TŌłłTk(Ōłå)

The proof identi’¼ües the left-hand side with the determinant of a skew-symmetric matrix, and the weighted enumerator for self-dual trees with its Pfaf’¼üan.

Self-dual balls of even dimension were considered by Martin, Maxwell, Reiner and Wilson in [MMRW15]. If X is a self-dual cellular ball of dimension d = 2k and Ōłé = Ōłék(X), then ╬╗(LkŌłÆ1(X)) = ŽäkŌłÆ1(X)Žäk(X) = Žäk(X)2. More generally, consider a weighting w such that wŽā = wŽāŌłŚ, where ŽāŌłŚ is the dual cell to Žā. Then ╬╗(LkalgŌłÆ1(X;w)) = Žäk(X;w)2, a consequence of [MMRW15, Cor. 6.10]. If in addition the self-duality on X is induced by an antipodal map, then it can be shown that X has an orientation giving rise to a symmetric or skew-symmetric boundary matrix Ōłé (depending on the parity of k). In either case ╬╗(LkŌłÆ1) = ╬╗(ŌłéŌłéŌłŚ) = ╬╗(Ōłé)2, so in fact Žäk(X) = ŽäkŌłÆ1(X) = ╬╗(Ōłé) and more generally Žäk(X;w) = ╬╗(DkŌłé) by [MMRW15, Thm. 7.4].

- 5 Connections, further directions and open problems


- 5.1 Critical groups of cell complexes


The theory of critical groups emerges from a discrete dynamical system that has been studied in mathematics, physics, probability, and even economics in several closely related forms, including the abelian sandpile model, the chip-’¼üring game, and the dollar game. Original sources include [BTW88, Big99, BLS91, Dha90, Lor91]. See [LP10] for a short accessible introduction to the subject, and [Mer05] for an overview.

The critical group can be de’¼üned purely algebraically from the Laplacian of a graph. In higher dimension, the algebraic de’¼ünitions have natural analogues using the tools developed earlier in the chapter.

Let G = (V,E) be a graph and let L = L(G) be the graph Laplacian. The critical group K(G) is the quotient group

K(G) = Tor(ZV/im L) = kerŌłé0/im L Ōł╝= Z|V|ŌłÆ1/im L╦£

where L╦£ is the reduced Laplacian (see Theorem 3.1). The isomorphism is due to Biggs [Big99, Thm. 4.2]. Regarding a vector c Ōłł ZV as a con’¼üguration in which ci is the number of grains of sand (or chips, or dollars) on vertex vi, the elements of the critical group can be thought of as equivalence classes of con’¼ügurations modulo a dispersive Laplacian action. A special system of coset representatives, the critical con’¼ügurations, encodes the possible long-term stable behaviors of the system.

By the matrix-tree theorem, the order of the critical group, and hence the number of distinct long-term con’¼ügurations, both equal the number of spanning trees of G.

There are deep connections between critical con’¼ügurations and spanning trees, as well as the combinatorics of parking functions, G-parking functions, and hyperplane arrangements; see, e.g., [BW97, CLB03, CP05, BCT10, PPW13, BS13, GK15a]. Accordingly, the ith critical group Ki(X) of a cell complex X is de’¼üned as

Ki(X) = Tor(ZXi/im Li) = kerŌłéi/im Li Ōł╝= Z|S|/im LS

where LS is the reduced Laplacian obtained by removing a torsion-free i-tree, provided one exists. The isomorphism was proven by Duval, Klivans and Martin [DKM13, Thm. 3.4] in the simplicial case; the proof carries over to the more general cellular setting. In analogy to the graph case, the size of Ki(X) is the forest count Žäi+1(X).

These higher critical groups model discrete dynamical systems that generalize the sandpile model [DKM13, ┬¦5]. A state of the system described by Ki(X) consists of a number for each i-cell; this quantity can be regarded as ŌĆ£chargeŌĆØ (i = 0), ŌĆ£currentŌĆØ (i = 1), ŌĆ£circulationŌĆØ (i = 2), etc. The Laplacian action redistributes this quantity between i-cells that lie in a common (i+1)-cell. When i = 0, this system is the sandpile model described brie’¼éy above. When i = 1, each state assigns a current to each edge, and redistribution takes the form of circulation around 2-cells. Because the con’¼ügurations are contained in kerŌłéi, the i-dimensional ’¼éow is conservative: the sum of oriented ’¼éow at every i-dimensional face containing a ’¼üxed (iŌłÆ1)-dimensional face is zero. When i = 1, the oriented ’¼éow on the edges neither accumulates nor depletes at any vertex. When i = 2, the face circulation at each edge adds up to zero.

The model can be regarded as having a sink consisting of an i-dimensional spanning tree. By specifying ’¼éow values on all i-faces that are not in the sink, the values on the sink needed to make the ’¼éow conservative are uniquely de’¼üned; this is why the con’¼ügurations can be described by the cokernel of the reduced Laplacian. Guzm┬┤an and Klivans [GK15b] have recently identi’¼üed meaningful systems of representatives of the higher critical group which re’¼éect the long term behavior of the Laplacian action.

##### 5.2 Cut and Flow Spaces

The critical group of a cell complex is closely related to its cuts and ’¼éows, which generalize the corresponding objects in graph theory. In a connected graph G, an (edge) cut is a collection of edges whose removal disconnects the graph, and a bond is a minimal cut. In matroid terms, a bond is a cocircuit: a minimal set of edges that meets every basis. The support of every row of the incidence matrix Ōłé is a cut, namely the set of all edges incident to a particular vertex, and more generally the cut space is de’¼üned as imŌłéŌłŚ, that is, the row space of Ōłé.

Meanwhile, a ’¼éow on G is an assignment of a ŌĆ£currentŌĆØ to each edge so that the total ’¼éow into each vertex equals the total ’¼éow out (called a conservative ’¼éow

above); that is, a ’¼éow is an element of the ’¼éow space kerŌłé = (imŌłéŌłŚ)ŌŖź. In matroid terms, the minimal supports of ’¼éows are circuits of the graphic matroid (i.e., simple cycles in G). The cut lattice C(G) and ’¼éow lattice F(G) are de’¼üned in the same way as the cut and ’¼éow spaces, except regarding Ōłé as a map of Z-modules rather than vector spaces.

Accordingly, for a cell complex Xd, the cut space, cut lattice, ’¼éow space, and ’¼éow lattice of X in dimension k are de’¼üned as

Cutk(X) = imRŌłékŌłŚ(X), Ck(X) = imZŌłékŌłŚ(X), Flowk(X) = kerRŌłék(X), Fk(X) = kerZŌłék(X).

An k-dimensional bond of X is a minimal set of k-faces that support a non-zero vector in Cutk(X), and a k-dimensional circuit of X is a minimal set of k-faces that support a non-zero vector of Flowk(X). (These are exactly the cocircuits and circuits, respectively, of the cellular matroid of X; see ┬¦5.4 and [SW10].) Flows and cuts can also be de’¼üned homologically: e.g., vectors in Flowd(X) are just elements of Hd(X;R), while vectors in Cutd(X) are sets of facets whose deletion increases codimension-1 homology.

Given a spanning tree T of a connected graph G, the (signed) characteristic vectors of the fundamental bonds and fundamental cycles of T form bases of the cut and ’¼éow spaces respectively, and in fact they are Z-module bases for the cut and ’¼éow lattices. This is a standard fact of algebraic graph theory [GR01, Chap. 14] that carries over well to general cell complexes [DKM15, ┬¦┬¦4ŌĆō6]. Predictably, it is necessary to account for torsion in higher dimension. The entries of the characteristic vectors of the fundamental bonds and circuits of a cellular spanning tree T ŌŖå X can be interpreted as cardinalities of certain torsion groups [DKM15, Thms. 4.11 and 5.3], and in order to form Z-module bases of Cd(X) or Fd(X), the tree T must be Z-acyclic.

For an integral lattice L (that is, a subgroup of Zn), the dual lattice is L = {w Ōłł Rn | w,v Ōłł Z ŌłĆv Ōłł L }, where  ┬Ę,┬Ę  is the standard inner product. Thus L ŌŖå L , and L /L is called the discriminant group (or determinantal group) of L . Bacher, de la Harpe and Nagnibeda [BdlHN97] proved that the groups K(G), C /C, F /F, and ZE(G)/(C ŌŖĢ F) are mutually isomorphic. (See also [GR01, Chap. 14].) The relationship between the cut and ’¼éow lattices, their discriminant groups, and the critical group of X is more complicated in arbitrary dimension. The isomorphisms are replaced with short exact sequences

0 ŌåÆ Zn/(C ŌŖĢF) ŌåÆ K(X) Ōł╝= C /C ŌåÆ E ŌåÆ 0, 0 ŌåÆ E ŌåÆ Zn/(C ŌŖĢF) ŌåÆ KŌłŚ(X) Ōł╝= F /F ŌåÆ 0

where E is the ŌĆ£error termŌĆØ Tor(HdŌłÆ1(X;Z)) [DKM15, Thms. 7.6 and 7.7], and KŌłŚ(X) is the cocritical group, de’¼üned roughly by dualizing the de’¼ünition of the critical group [DKM15, Defn. 7.4]. In particular, the groups K(X), KŌłŚ(X), C /C,

- F /F, and ZE(G)/(C ŌŖĢF) are all isomorphic if and only if HdŌłÆ1(X;Z) is torsionfree.


Bacher, de la Harpe and NagnibedaŌĆÖs work in [BdlHN97] arose from viewing a graph as a combinatorial analogue of a Riemann surface, where the critical group appears as the discrete analogue of the Picard group of divisors, or the Jacobian group of holomorphic forms. This point of view also informs the graphical Riemann-Roch theorem of Baker and Norine [BN07] and subsequent work connected to tropical geometry [Luo11, HMY12, HKN13]. An open problem posed in [DKM13, ┬¦6] is to understand how the combinatorics of critical and cocritical groups on cell complexes parallels the geometric theory of group invariants such as Chow groups on algebraic varieties.

##### 5.3 Trees and simplicial complex decomposition

Recall from De’¼ünitions 2.15 and 2.16 that a directed rooted spanning forest of a cell complex Xd is a rooted spanning forest (F,R), together with an orientation O that pairs each (d ŌłÆ 1)-face Žü outside the root R with a facet Žå Ōłł F that contains Žü. As seen in Example 2.17, rooted forests of dimension Ōēź 2 can admit more than one orientation: as shown by Bernardi and Klivans [BK], the number of valid orientations is at least |HdŌłÆ1(F,R)|. Equality need not hold: for instance, rooted triangulations of the (torsion-free) dunce cap can admit multiple orientations. In an appropriate linear-algebraic sense, these excess orientations cancel in pairs to the size of the torsion subgroup. It is an open problem to give a combinatorial explanation of this cancellation; see [BK].

Iterating the construction of a directed rooted spanning forest gives a discrete (although not gradient) vector ’¼üeld in the sense of discrete Morse theory [For98, For02]. To be precise, let (F,R,O) be a directed rooted d-forest of Xd. Then R is a (d ŌłÆ1)-dimensional subcomplex of Xd. Choose a directed rooted forest of R which further pairs faces of Xd, this time of dimensions (d ŌłÆ2) and (d ŌłÆ1). Continuing this process, the vector ’¼üeld is then given by the union of the pairings, and the unmatched cells are enumerated by the Betti numbers of X. For example, consider the directed spanning 2-tree of RP2 shown in (a) or (b) of Figure 5. This is the 1-dimensional root, and the arrows indicate the bijection O : F ŌåÆ X1 \ R. In the next iteration, choose a single vertex as the 0-dimensional root, and orient all of the edges of R away from the root to match them with nonroot vertices. Finally, match the empty face with the root vertex.

These recursive orientations arise in theorems and conjectures about decompositions of simplicial complexes, with applications to their f- and h-vectors. In particular, certain results about decompositions of simplicial complexes can be usefully restated in the language of simplicial forests and orientations, as we now describe.

Suppose that Ōłå is a simplicial complex that is acyclic over at least one coef’¼ücient ring (it does not matter which), so that the f-polynomial f(Ōłå,x) = ŌłæŽāŌłłŌłå x|Žā| is divisible by xŌłÆ1. Stanley explained this algebraic fact combinatorially by showing that the face poset of Ōłå can be decomposed as Ōłå Ōł¬ ╦Ö Ōä”, where Ōłå is a subcomplex and there is a bijection ╬Ę : Ōłå ŌåÆ Ōä” such that every Žā Ōłł Ōłå is a maximal proper

subface of ╬Ę(Žā) [Sta93, Thm. 1.2]. Duval [Duv94, Thm. 1.1] showed more generally that every simplicial complex Ōłå admits a decomposition BŌł¬╦Ö Ōłå Ōł¬ ╦Ö Ōä”, where

- B contains ╬▓k(Ōłå) faces for each k and Ōłå ,Ōä” are as just described. DuvalŌĆÖs result (which in fact holds for all regular cell complexes) led to a new proof of Bj┬©orner and KalaiŌĆÖs characterization of f-vector/Betti-number pairs of arbitrary simplicial complexes [BK88], without using algebraic shifting. In StanleyŌĆÖs and DuvalŌĆÖs constructions, the set Ōä” is a ’¼éag of forests: an order ’¼ülter in the face poset of Ōłå such


that for every k, the set Ōä”k = {Žā Ōłł Ōä” | dimŽā = k} is the set of facets of a spanning k-forest of Ōłå.

More generally, Stanley conjectured [Sta93, Conj. 2.4] that if Ōłå is k-uply acyclic, i.e., if the link of every face of dimension Ōēż k ŌłÆ 2 is acyclic, then its face poset can be decomposed into Boolean algebras of rank k. The k = 1 case is StanleyŌĆÖs result cited above. The general ce remains open, although Duval and Zhang proved a weakening of StanleyŌĆÖs conjecture in [DZ01]. Stanley introduced this conjecture in the same context as the partitionability conjecture, which stated that every CohenMacaulay simplicial complex Ōłå can be partitioned into Boolean intervals whose tops are its facets, with ranks given by the h-vector. In light of Remark 2.14, there are implications

every link in X has a Z-acyclic spanning tree

=ŌćÆ

X is CohenMacaulay

=ŌćÆ

every link in X has a spanning tree

because by ReisnerŌĆÖs criterion [Rei76], a simplicial complex is Cohen-Macaulay if the link of every face is Z-APC.

The present authors envisioned simplicial spanning trees as an inroad to the partitionability conjecture, culminating in its disproof in [DGKM15]. Meanwhile, in a different direction, Katth┬©an [Kat14] had discovered that the depth conjecture (proposed by Stanley [Sta82]; see also [PSFTY09, Her13]) could be reduced to the study of certain lattices associated to simplicial spanning trees. While the disproof of the partitionability conjecture implies that the depth conjecture is also false in general, Katth┬©anŌĆÖs methods reveal a deeper connection between trees and combinatorial commutative algebra: e.g., he showed that spanning trees of simplex skeletons (which he called stoss complexes) arise as the Scarf complexes of certain extremal lattices [Kat14, Thm. 4.3].

##### 5.4 Trees and Matroids

As mentioned in ┬¦2.5, the collection of all spanning forests of a cell complex X forms the collection of bases of a matroid, the cellular matroid M(X), which generalizes the simplicial matroids of [CL87] and coincides with the well-known graphic matroid in dimension 1. Matroid structures such as cocircuits are useful in studying cellular trees (as in ┬¦5.2), so it is natural to ask what other matroid structures and invariants mean in the context of trees.

Krushkal and Renardy [KR14] studied a polynomial invariant on cell complexes that generalizes the Tutte polynomial of the cellular matroid. (For a general reference on the Tutte polynomial, see [BO92].) Let X be a cell complex whose geometric realization is an orientable manifold of even dimension. Its KrushkalRenardy invariant PX(x,y,a,b) is a generating function for spanning d-dimensional subcomplexes Y ŌŖå X, in which the exponents of x,y record combinatorial information about the cellular matroid and those of a,b record topological information about the embedding of Y in X. Setting a = b = 1 recovers the Tutte polynomial of M(X), and P satis’¼ües a duality relation PX(x,y,a,b) = PXŌłŚ(y,x,b,a), where XŌłŚ is the dual cell complex [KR14, Thm. 14], generalizing the usual Tutte duality relation TM(x,y) = TMŌłŚ(y,x) on matroids.

Evaluating the Tutte polynomial TM(x,y) of a matroid M at (x,y) = (1,1) gives the number of bases of M. If M is the graphic matroid of a graph G then TM(1,1) = Žä(G), but this equality does not hold for most cellular matroids because of torsion. On the other hand, torsion can be modeled combinatorially via the theory of arithmetic matroids, introduced by dŌĆÖAdderio and Moci [DM12, DM13b, DM13a] and further developed by Fink and Moci [FM12]. An arithmetic matroid is a matroid equipped with a multiplicity function m that models the number of torsion elements in an abelian group. The arithmetic Tutte polynomial studied in [DM12, DM13b] records this multiplicity. For a cellular matroid M(Xd), the multiplicity of a set A of facets is |Tor(HdŌłÆ1(AŌł¬XŌēżdŌłÆ1;Z))|2, and evaluating the arithmetic Tutte polynomial at (x,y) = (1,1) gives the torsion-weighted tree count of X. Bajo, Burdick and Chmutov [BBC14] similarly modi’¼üed the Krushkal-Renardy polynomial to include a torsion factor, again obtaining the torsion-weighted tree count as a suitable evaluation of their polynomial invariant.

The matroid structure for trees suggests that graph algorithms could carry over well to the general setting of cell complexes. Of particular interest is the problem of sampling random trees, proposed by Russell Lyons [Lyo09] and Igor Pak. In the graph case, there exist ef’¼ücient algorithms for tree sampling. The best known is WilsonŌĆÖs loop-erased random walk algorithm [Wil96], which generates a uniformly distributed random spanning tree. Extending WilsonŌĆÖs algorithm to general cell complexes is likely to be hard, as there is no known ef’¼ücient algorithm to sample random bases of an arbitrary matroid. (It is possible for some classes, including equitable matroids; see [May06]; Gorodezky and Pak [GP14] generalized WilsonŌĆÖs algorithm to a restricted class of hypergraphs that do not coincide with cellular forests.) One could look for an algorithm that samples cellular trees either uniformly, or according to a distribution that includes torsion information. Indeed, this problem informs LyonsŌĆÖ motivation in [Lyo09], in which he de’¼üned determinantal probability measures on cellular trees based on the Laplacian.

Acknowledgements We thank our colleagues Amy Wagler and Jennifer Wagner for valuable suggestions regarding exposition and clarity.

##### References

[AD] Ghodratollah Aalipour and Art M. Duval, Weighted spanning tree enumerators of color-shifted complexes, in preparation. [Adi92] Ron M. Adin, Counting colorful multi-dimensional trees, Combinatorica 12 (1992), no. 3, 247ŌĆō260. MR 1195888 (93j:05036) [ADM] Ghodratollah Aalipour, Art M. Duval, and Jeremy L. Martin, Weighted spanning tree enumerators of complete colorful complexes, in preparation. [Aus60] T. L. Austin, The enumeration of point labelled chromatic graphs and trees, Canad. J. Math. 12 (1960), 535ŌĆō545. MR 0139544 (25 #2976)

[BBC14] Carlos Bajo, Bradley Burdick, and Sergei Chmutov, On the Tutte-Krushkal-Renardy polynomial for cell complexes, J. Combin. Theory Ser. A 123 (2014), 186ŌĆō201. MR 3157807

[BBGM14] Matthias Beck, Felix Breuer, Logan Godkin, and Jeremy L. Martin, Enumerating colorings, tensions and ’¼éows in cell complexes, J. Combin. Theory Ser. A 122 (2014), 82ŌĆō106. MR 3127679

[BCT10] Brian Benson, Deeparnab Chakrabarty, and Prasad Tetali, G-parking functions, acyclic orientations and spanning trees, Discrete Math. 310 (2010), no. 8, 1340ŌĆō1353. MR 2592488 (2011i:05152)

[BdlHN97] Roland Bacher, Pierre de la Harpe, and Tatiana Nagnibeda, The lattice of integral ’¼éows and the lattice of integral cuts on a ’¼ünite graph, Bull. Soc. Math. France 125

(1997), no. 2, 167ŌĆō198. MR 1478029 (99c:05111) [Ber12] Olivier Bernardi, On the spanning trees of the hypercube and other products of graphs, Electron. J. Combin. 19 (2012), no. 4, Paper 51, 16. MR 3007186

[BH06] Matthias Beck and Serkan Ho┬Ėsten, Cyclotomic polytopes and growth series of cyclotomic lattices, Math. Res. Lett. 13 (2006), no. 4, 607ŌĆō622. MR 2250495 (2007h:52018)

[Big99] N. L. Biggs, Chip-’¼üring and the critical group of a graph, J. Algebraic Combin. 9

(1999), no. 1, 25ŌĆō45. MR 1676732 (2000h:05103) [BK] Olivier Bernardi and Caroline J. Klivans, Directed rooted forests in higher dimension, in preparation. [BK88] Anders Bj┬©orner and Gil Kalai, An extended Euler-Poincar┬┤e theorem, Acta Math. 161

(1988), no. 3-4, 279ŌĆō303. MR 971798 (89m:52009) [BLS91] Anders Bj┬©orner, L┬┤aszl┬┤o Lov┬┤asz, and Peter W. Shor, Chip-’¼üring games on graphs, European J. Combin. 12 (1991), no. 4, 283ŌĆō291. MR 1120415 (92g:90193)

- [BN06] Eric Babson and Isabella Novik, Face numbers and nongeneric initial ideals, Electron. J. Combin. 11 (2004/06), no. 2, Research Paper 25, 23 pp. (electronic). MR 2195431 (2007c:05202)
- [BN07] Matthew Baker and Serguei Norine, Riemann-Roch and Abel-Jacobi theory on a ’¼ünite graph, Adv. Math. 215 (2007), no. 2, 766ŌĆō788. MR 2355607 (2008m:05167)


[BO92] Thomas Brylawski and James Oxley, The Tutte polynomial and its applications, Matroid applications, Encyclopedia Math. Appl., vol. 40, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1992, pp. 123ŌĆō225. MR 1165543 (93k:05060)

[Bol76] Ethan D. Bolker, Simplicial geometry and transportation polytopes, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 217 (1976), 121ŌĆō142. MR 0411983 (54 #112)

[Bor60] C. W. Borchardt, Uber┬© eine Interpolationsformel f┬©ur eine Art Symmetrischer Functionen und uber┬© Deren Anwendung, Math. Abh. der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin (1860), 1ŌĆō20.

[BP71] L. W. Beineke and R. E. Pippert, Properties and characterizations of k-trees, Mathematika 18 (1971), 141ŌĆō151. MR 0288046 (44 #5244)

[BPT15] Yurii Burman, Andrey Ploskonosov, and Anastasia Tro’¼ümova, Matrix-tree theorems and discrete path integration, Linear Algebra Appl. 466 (2015), 64ŌĆō82. MR 3278240

[BS13] Matthew Baker and Farbod Shokrieh, Chip-’¼üring games, potential theory on graphs, and spanning trees, J. Combin. Theory Ser. A 120 (2013), no. 1, 164ŌĆō182. MR 2971705

[BTW88] Per Bak, Chao Tang, and Kurt Wiesenfeld, Self-organized criticality, Phys. Rev. A (3)

38 (1988), no. 1, 364ŌĆō374. MR 949160 (89g:58126)

[BW97] Norman Biggs and Peter Winkler, Chip-’¼üring and the chromatic polynomial, Tech. Report LSE-CDAM-97-03, London School of Economics, Center for Discrete and Applicable Mathematics, 1997.

[CCK12] Michael J. Catanzaro, Vladimir Y. Chernyak, and John R. Klein, KirchhoffŌĆÖs theorems in higher dimensions and Reidemeister torsion, Preprint, arXiv:1206.6783, 2012.

[CDS80] Drago╦ćs M. Cvetkovi┬┤c, Michael Doob, and Horst Sachs, Spectra of graphs, Pure and Applied Mathematics, vol. 87, Academic Press, Inc. [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Publishers], New York-London, 1980, Theory and application. MR 572262 (81i:05054)

[Chu97] Fan R. K. Chung, Spectral graph theory, CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics, vol. 92, Published for the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences, Washington, DC; by the American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1997. MR 1421568 (97k:58183)

[CL87] Raul Cordovil and Bernt Lindstr┬©om, Simplicial matroids, Combinatorial geometries, Encyclopedia Math. Appl., vol. 29, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1987, pp. 98ŌĆō

113. MR 921070

[CLB03] Robert Cori and Yvan Le Borgne, The sand-pile model and Tutte polynomials, Adv. in Appl. Math. 30 (2003), no. 1-2, 44ŌĆō52, Formal power series and algebraic combinatorics (Scottsdale, AZ, 2001). MR 1979782 (2004d:05095)

[CP05] Denis Chebikin and Pavlo Pylyavskyy, A family of bijections between G-parking functions and spanning trees, J. Combin. Theory Ser. A 110 (2005), no. 1, 31ŌĆō41. MR 2128964 (2005m:05010)

[Cra67] Henry H. Crapo, A higher invariant for matroids, J. Combinatorial Theory 2 (1967), 406ŌĆō417. MR 0215744 (35 #6579) [Cve71] Drago╦ćs M. Cvetkovi┬┤c, The spectral method for determining the number of trees, Publ. Inst. Math. (Beograd) (N.S.) 11(25) (1971), 135ŌĆō141. MR 0309772 (46 #8877) [Den01] Graham Denham, The combinatorial Laplacian of the Tutte complex, J. Algebra 242

(2001), no. 1, 160ŌĆō175. MR 1844702 (2002h:05039) [Dew74] A. K. Dewdney, Higher-dimensional tree structures, J. Combinatorial Theory Ser. B

17 (1974), 160ŌĆō169. MR 0369115 (51 #5351)

[DGKM15] Art M. Duval, Bennet Goeckner, Caroline J. Klivans, and Jeremy L. Martin, A non-

partitionable cohen-macaulay simplicial complex, preprint, arXiv:1504.04279, 2015. [Dha90] Deepak Dhar, Self-organized critical state of sandpile automaton models, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 64 (1990), no. 14, 1613ŌĆō1616. MR 1044086 (90m:82053)

[DKM09] Art M. Duval, Caroline J. Klivans, and Jeremy L. Martin, Simplicial matrix-tree theorems, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 361 (2009), no. 11, 6073ŌĆō6114. MR 2529925 (2011a:05385)

[DKM11] , Cellular spanning trees and Laplacians of cubical complexes, Adv. in Appl. Math. 46 (2011), no. 1-4, 247ŌĆō274. MR 2794024 (2012e:05182) [DKM13] , Critical groups of simplicial complexes, Ann. Comb. 17 (2013), no. 1, 53ŌĆō

70. MR 3027573

[DKM15] , Cuts and ’¼éows of cell complexes, J. Algebraic Combin. 41 (2015), 969ŌĆō999. [DM12] Michele DŌĆÖAdderio and Luca Moci, Ehrhart polynomial and arithmetic Tutte polynomial, European J. Combin. 33 (2012), no. 7, 1479ŌĆō1483. MR 2923464 [DM13a] , Arithmetic matroids, the Tutte polynomial and toric arrangements, Adv.

Math. 232 (2013), 335ŌĆō367. MR 2989987 [DM13b] , Graph colorings, ’¼éows and arithmetic Tutte polynomial, J. Combin. Theory Ser. A 120 (2013), no. 1, 11ŌĆō27. MR 2971693

[DP76] J. Dodziuk and V. K. Patodi, Riemannian structures and triangulations of manifolds, J. Indian Math. Soc. (N.S.) 40 (1976), no. 1-4, 1ŌĆō52 (1977). MR 0488179 (58 #7742)

[DR02] Art M. Duval and Victor Reiner, Shifted simplicial complexes are Laplacian integral, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 354 (2002), no. 11, 4313ŌĆō4344 (electronic). MR 1926878 (2003j:15017)

[Duv94] Art M. Duval, A combinatorial decomposition of simplicial complexes, Israel J. Math.

87 (1994), no. 1-3, 77ŌĆō87. MR 1286816 (96e:52023)

[DZ01] Art M. Duval and Ping Zhang, Iterated homology and decompositions of simplicial complexes, Israel J. Math. 121 (2001), 313ŌĆō331. MR 1818393 (2003a:52013) [Eck45] Beno Eckmann, Harmonische Funktionen und Randwertaufgaben in einem Komplex, Comment. Math. Helv. 17 (1945), 240ŌĆō255. MR 0013318 (7,138f)

[EvW04] Richard Ehrenborg and Stephanie van Willigenburg, Enumerative properties of Ferrers graphs, Discrete Comput. Geom. 32 (2004), no. 4, 481ŌĆō492. MR 2096744 (2005j:05076)

[Far02] Sara Faridi, The facet ideal of a simplicial complex, Manuscripta Math. 109 (2002), no. 2, 159ŌĆō174. MR 1935027 (2003k:13027) [FH98] Joel Friedman and Phil Hanlon, On the Betti numbers of chessboard complexes, J. Algebraic Combin. 8 (1998), no. 2, 193ŌĆō203. MR 1648484 (2000c:05155) [FM12] Alex Fink and Luca Moci, Matroids over a ring, J. Eur. Math. Soc., to appear; arXiv:1209.6571, 2012. [For98] Robin Forman, Morse theory for cell complexes, Adv. Math. 134 (1998), no. 1, 90ŌĆō

145. MR 1612391 (99b:57050) [For02] , A userŌĆÖs guide to discrete Morse theory, S┬┤em. Lothar. Combin. 48 (2002), Art. B48c, 35. MR 1939695 (2003j:57040) [Fri98] J. Friedman, Computing Betti numbers via combinatorial Laplacians, Algorithmica

21 (1998), no. 4, 331ŌĆō346. MR 1622290 (99c:52022)

[FS58] Miroslav Fiedler and Ji╦ćr┬┤─▒ Sedl┬┤a╦ćcek, Uber┬© Wurzelbasen von gerichteten Graphen, Casopis╦ć P╦ćest. Mat. 83 (1958), 214ŌĆō225. MR 0097071 (20 #3551)

- [GK15a] Johnny Guzm┬┤an and Caroline Klivans, Chip-’¼üring and energy minimization on Mmatrices, J. Combin. Theory Ser. A 132 (2015), 14ŌĆō31. MR 3311336
- [GK15b] , Chip-’¼üring on general invertible matrices, in preparation, 2015. [GP14] Igor Gorodezky and Igor Pak, Generalized loop-erased random walks and approx-


imate reachability, Random Structures Algorithms 44 (2014), no. 2, 201ŌĆō223. MR 3158629

[GR01] Chris Godsil and Gordon Royle, Algebraic graph theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 207, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2001. MR 1829620 (2002f:05002) [Hat02] Allen Hatcher, Algebraic topology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002. MR 1867354 (2002k:55001)

[Her13] J┬©urgen Herzog, A survey on Stanley depth, Monomial ideals, computations and applications, Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 2083, Springer, Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 3ŌĆō45. MR 3184118

[HK96] P. L. Hammer and A. K. Kelmans, Laplacian spectra and spanning trees of threshold graphs, Discrete Appl. Math. 65 (1996), no. 1-3, 255ŌĆō273, First International Colloquium on Graphs and Optimization (GOI), 1992 (Grimentz). MR 1380078 (97d:05205)

[HKN13] Jan Hladk┬┤y, Daniel Kr┬┤al,ŌĆÖ and Serguei Norine, Rank of divisors on tropical curves, J. Combin. Theory Ser. A 120 (2013), no. 7, 1521ŌĆō1538. MR 3092681

[HLM99] J┬©urgen Herzog and Enzo Maria Li Marzi, Bounds for the Betti numbers of shellable simplicial complexes and polytopes, Commutative algebra and algebraic geometry (Ferrara), Lecture Notes in Pure and Appl. Math., vol. 206, Dekker, New York, 1999, pp. 157ŌĆō167. MR 1702104 (2001b:13017)

[HMY12] Christian Haase, Gregg Musiker, and Josephine Yu, Linear systems on tropical curves, Math. Z. 270 (2012), no. 3-4, 1111ŌĆō1140. MR 2892941 [Joy81] Andr┬┤e Joyal, Une th┬┤eorie combinatoire des s┬┤eries formelles, Adv. in Math. 42 (1981), no. 1, 1ŌĆō82. MR 633783 [Kal83] Gil Kalai, Enumeration of Q-acyclic simplicial complexes, Israel J. Math. 45 (1983), no. 4, 337ŌĆō351. MR 720308 (85a:55006) [Kat14] Lukas Katth┬©an, Stanley depth and simplicial spanning trees, J. Algebraic Combin., to appear; arXiv:1410.3666, 2014.

[Kir47] G. Kirchhoff, Uber┬© die Au’¼é┬©osung der Gleichungen, auf welche man bei der Untersuchung der linearen Verteilung galvanischer Str┬©ome gef┬©uhrt wird, Ann. Phys. Chem. 72 (1847), 497ŌĆō508.

- [KL15a] Woong Kook and Kang-Ju Lee, A formula for simplicial tree numbers of matroid complexes, 2015, preprint.
- [KL15b] , Weighted tree-numbers of matroid complexes, 27th International Conference on Formal Power Series and Algebraic Combinatorics (FPSAC 2015), Discrete Math. Theor. Comput. Sci. Proc., AS, Assoc. Discrete Math. Theor. Comput. Sci., Nancy, 2015, to appear.


[KR14] Vyacheslav Krushkal and David Renardy, A polynomial invariant and duality for triangulations, Electron. J. Combin. 21 (2014), no. 3, Paper 3.42, 22. MR 3262279 [KRS00] W. Kook, V. Reiner, and D. Stanton, Combinatorial Laplacians of matroid complexes, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 13 (2000), no. 1, 129ŌĆō148. MR 1697094 (2001e:05028)

[KW68] Victor Klee and Christoph Witzgall, Facets and vertices of transportation polytopes, Mathematics of the Decision Sciences, Part I (Seminar, Stanford, Calif., 1967), Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1968, pp. 257ŌĆō282. MR 0235832

[Lor91] Dino J. Lorenzini, A ’¼ünite group attached to the Laplacian of a graph, Discrete Math.

91 (1991), no. 3, 277ŌĆō282. MR 1129991 (93a:05091)

[LP10] Lionel Levine and James Propp, What is ... a sandpile?, Notices Amer. Math. Soc.

57 (2010), no. 8, 976ŌĆō979. MR 2667495

[Luo11] Ye Luo, Rank-determining sets of metric graphs, J. Combin. Theory Ser. A 118

(2011), no. 6, 1775ŌĆō1793. MR 2793609 (2012d:05122) [Lyo09] Russell Lyons, Random complexes and l2-Betti numbers, J. Topol. Anal. 1 (2009), no. 2, 153ŌĆō175. MR 2541759 (2010k:05130)

- [Max09] Molly Maxwell, Enumerating bases of self-dual matroids, J. Combin. Theory Ser. A 116 (2009), no. 2, 351ŌĆō378. MR 2475022 (2010a:05048)
- [May06] Dillon Mayhew, Equitable matroids, Electron. J. Combin. 13 (2006), no. 1, Research Paper 41, 8 pp. (electronic). MR 2223516 (2007c:05047)


[Mer94] Russell Merris, Degree maximal graphs are Laplacian integral, Linear Algebra Appl.

199 (1994), 381ŌĆō389. MR 1274427 (95e:05083)

[Mer05] Criel Merino, The chip-’¼üring game, Discrete Math. 302 (2005), no. 1-3, 188ŌĆō210. MR 2179643 (2007c:91036) [Mil66] J. Milnor, Whitehead torsion, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 72 (1966), 358ŌĆō426. MR 0196736 (33 #4922)

[MMRW15] Jeremy L. Martin, Molly Maxwell, Victor Reiner, and Scott O. Wilson, Pseudodeterminants and perfect square spanning tree counts, J. Comb. 6 (2015), no. 3, 295ŌĆō325.

[Moo70] J. W. Moon, Counting labelled trees, From lectures delivered to the Twelfth Biennial Seminar of the Canadian Mathematical Congress (Vancouver, vol. 1969, Canadian Mathematical Congress, Montreal, Que., 1970. MR 0274333 (43 #98)

[MP95] N. V. R. Mahadev and U. N. Peled, Threshold graphs and related topics, Annals of Discrete Mathematics, vol. 56, North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1995. MR 1417258 (97h:05001)

[MR03] Jeremy L. Martin and Victor Reiner, Factorization of some weighted spanning tree enumerators, J. Combin. Theory Ser. A 104 (2003), no. 2, 287ŌĆō300. MR 2019276 (2004i:05070)

[MR05] , Cyclotomic and simplicial matroids, Israel J. Math. 150 (2005), 229ŌĆō240. MR 2255809 (2007g:05040) [MR14] Gregg Musiker and Victor Reiner, The cyclotomic polynomial topologically, J. Reine Angew. Math. 687 (2014), 113ŌĆō132. MR 3176609 [MV02] Gregor Masbaum and Arkady Vaintrob, A new matrix-tree theorem, Int. Math. Res. Not. (2002), no. 27, 1397ŌĆō1426. MR 1908476 (2003a:05107) [Oxl11] James Oxley, Matroid theory, second ed., Oxford Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 21, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011. MR 2849819 (2012k:05002) [Pet09] Anna Petersson, Enumeration of spanning trees in simplicial complexes, MasterŌĆÖs thesis, Uppsala Universitet, 2009.

[PPW13] David Perkinson, Jacob Perlman, and John Wilmes, Primer for the algebraic geometry of sandpiles, Tropical and non-Archimedean geometry, Contemp. Math., vol. 605, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2013, pp. 211ŌĆō256. MR 3204273

[Pr┬©u18] H. Pr┬©ufer, Neuer Beweis eines Satzes uber┬© Permutationen, Arch. Math. Phys. 27

(1918), 142ŌĆō144.

[PSFTY09] Mohammad R. Pournaki, Seyed A. Seyed Fakhari, Massoud Tousi, and Siamak Yassemi, What is ... Stanley depth?, Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 56 (2009), no. 9, 1106ŌĆō1108. MR 2568497 (2010k:05346)

[Rei76] Gerald Allen Reisner, Cohen-Macaulay quotients of polynomial rings, Advances in Math. 21 (1976), no. 1, 30ŌĆō49. MR 0407036 (53 #10819)

[RW02] Jeffery B. Remmel and S. Gill Williamson, Spanning trees and function classes, Electron. J. Combin. 9 (2002), no. 1, Research Paper 34, 24 pp. (electronic). MR 1928786 (2003g:05067)

[Sco62] H. I. Scoins, The number of trees with nodes of alternate parity, Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 58 (1962), 12ŌĆō16. MR 0136554 (25 #24) [SH59] M.A. Simmonard and G.F. Hadley, The maximum number of iterations in the transportation problem, Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 6 (1959), 125ŌĆō129. [Sta82] Richard P. Stanley, Linear Diophantine equations and local cohomology, Invent. Math. 68 (1982), no. 2, 175ŌĆō193. MR 666158 (83m:10017) [Sta93] , A combinatorial decomposition of acyclic simplicial complexes, Discrete Math. 120 (1993), no. 1-3, 175ŌĆō182. MR 1235904 (94k:55027) [Sta96] , Combinatorics and commutative algebra, second ed., Progress in Mathematics, vol. 41, Birkh┬©auser Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, 1996. MR 1453579 (98h:05001)

[Sta99] , Enumerative combinatorics. Vol. 2, Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 62, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999, With a foreword by Gian-Carlo Rota and appendix 1 by Sergey Fomin. MR 1676282 (2000k:05026)

[Sta07] , An introduction to hyperplane arrangements, Geometric combinatorics, IAS/Park City Math. Ser., vol. 13, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2007, pp. 389ŌĆō

496. MR 2383131 [SW10] Yi Su and David G. Wagner, The lattice of integer ’¼éows of a regular matroid, J. Combin. Theory Ser. B 100 (2010), no. 6, 691ŌĆō703. MR 2718687 (2012a:05066) [Syl57] J.J. Sylvester, On the change of systems of independent variables, Quart. J. Math. 1

(1857), 42ŌĆō56, Collected Mathematical Papers, vol. 2, Cambridge, 1908, pp. 65-85.

[Tut79] W. T. Tutte, On the spanning trees of self-dual maps, Second International Conference on Combinatorial Mathematics (New York, 1978), Ann. New York Acad. Sci., vol. 319, New York Acad. Sci., New York, 1979, pp. 540ŌĆō548. MR 556066 (81c:05031)

[Wil96] David Bruce Wilson, Generating random spanning trees more quickly than the cover time, Proceedings of the Twenty-eighth Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing (Philadelphia, PA, 1996), ACM, New York, 1996, pp. 296ŌĆō303. MR 1427525

